The Project Gutenberg EBook of Dictionary of English Proverbs and
Proverbial Phrases, by Thomas Preston

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Dictionary of English Proverbs and Proverbial Phrases
       With a Copious Index of Principal Words

Author: Thomas Preston

Release Date: March 27, 2012 [EBook #39281]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ENGLISH PROVERBS ***




Produced by Delphine Lettau, Lisa Reigel, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







Transcriber's Notes: Variations in spelling and hyphenation have been
left as in the original. Words in italics in the original are surrounded
by _underscores_. Ellipses match the original.

A few typographical errors have been corrected. A complete list follows
the text.




                                  A

                              DICTIONARY

                                  OF

                           ENGLISH PROVERBS




THE FAMILIAR QUOTATIONS SERIES OF BOOKS.

Price 1s. cloth; 1s. 6d. half-bound in leather, red edges.


     1. FAMILIAR LATIN QUOTATIONS & PROVERBS.

     2. FAMILIAR FRENCH QUOTATIONS & PROVERBS.

     3. FAMILIAR ENGLISH QUOTATIONS.

     4. A HANDY CLASSICAL DICTIONARY.

     5. BIBLE TRUTHS WITH SHAKESPEARIAN PARALLELS. By J. B.
     Selkirk.

     6. A HANDY BOOK OF SYNONYMS, CONTAINING ABOUT 33,000 ENGLISH
     WORDS.

     7. THE SECRETARY'S ASSISTANT AND CORRESPONDENT'S GUIDE.
     Nineteenth Edition.

     8. TOURIST'S FRENCH PRONOUNCING HANDBOOK.

     9. REASONS WHY WE BELIEVE THE BIBLE. By the Rev. James
     Copland, M.A.

     10. TALES FROM SHAKSPEARE. By Charles Lamb.

     11. A DICTIONARY OF DAILY BLUNDERS CORRECTING THEM.

     12. RASSELAS. By Dr. Johnson.

     13. ELIZABETH, OR THE EXILES OF SIBERIA.

     14. REJECTED ADDRESSES.

     15. A DICTIONARY OF ENGLISH PROVERBS.

     16. PLUTARCH'S LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN.

     17. DE QUINCEY'S OPIUM-EATER.

     18. THE STORY OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. By the Rev. A. Carter,
     M.A.

     19. A DICTIONARY OF MYTHOLOGY.

     20. MOORE'S IRISH MELODIES.

     21. MOORE'S LALLA ROOKH.


TRIPLICATE VOLUMES.

Coloured edges, 3s. each.

     1. HANDBOOK FOR WRITERS & READERS (_English_).

     2. REFERENCE HANDBOOK OF QUOTATIONS, _English, French and
     Latin_.

     3. LAMB'S TALES FROM SHAKSPEARE, RASSELAS, & ELIZABETH.

     4. REFERENCE HANDBOOK FOR BIBLE & GENERAL READERS.

     5. HANDBOOK FOR WRITERS & READERS (_Classical_); CLASSICAL
     DICTIONARY, PLUTARCH, AND MYTHOLOGY.




                                  A

                              DICTIONARY

                                  OF

                           English Proverbs

                                 AND

                          Proverbial Phrases

                                 WITH

                  A COPIOUS INDEX OF PRINCIPAL WORDS

                       _SELECTED AND ARRANGED_


                           BY THE AUTHOR OF

                  'A DICTIONARY OF DAILY BLUNDERS,'

                     'A HANDY BOOK OF SYNONYMS,'

                              ETC. ETC.


                       LONDON: WHITTAKER & CO.




     "The genius, wit, and spirit of a nation are discovered by
     their proverbs."--LORD BACON.




PREFACE.


Long before writing and books were in common use, proverbs were the
principal means of imparting instruction. In modern times there is not
so much need to apply these old sayings as a means of educating the
people, but they are still constantly met with in the newspapers and in
general literature, and they are rightly considered as "The texts of
common life."

The late Earl Russell very aptly described a proverb as "The wisdom of
many and the wit of one." We value proverbs chiefly as moral maxims
teaching some practical lesson set forth in concise, pithy sentences,
which are fixed in the memory without effort, and retained without being
burdensome. They have been found useful for guidance in almost every
condition of life; but, on the other hand, it is quite true that many
dangerous precepts have been propounded in proverbs, and some of the
older ones gave such questionable advice, or were couched in such
objectionable language, that they have been very properly omitted from
every collection intended, as this is, for general use. Other old
proverbs have become obsolete, and as their meaning is now obscure, they
have not been included in the Dictionary.

This series of "Handy Books" would hardly be complete without a
collection of English Proverbs. Many books on the subject have been
written, but it is hoped that this collection will, in some respects, be
found to be an improvement on all its predecessors. Like _The Dictionary
of Daily Blunders_, this _Dictionary of English Proverbs_ has been
framed so as to enable the reader to find what he wants without
difficulty. The Dictionary itself is arranged according to the principal
words, and there is also a Copious Index of additional principal words.

Other modern collections profess to give an "Alphabetical Index," but
such an index is of little use when we find that it is framed on the
rule that because a proverb begins with the article _A_, it should
therefore be indexed under that letter. As, "A bald head is soon
shaven." In another similar Index we find the proverb, "'Tis the second
blow makes the fray," inserted under the letter _T_. In one index of
this kind there are no less than twenty-two pages of _A's_ and almost
as many of _The's_. Indeed the whole index is compiled without the
slightest regard to the subject of the proverbs. On this subject
Disraeli, in his essay on the "Philosophy of Proverbs," says "The
arrangement of proverbs has baffled the ingenuity of every one of their
collectors. Ray, after long premeditation, has chosen a system with the
appearance of an alphabetical order, but it turns out that his system is
no system, and his alphabet is no alphabet. After ten years' labour the
good man could only arrange his proverbs by commonplaces." In this
little Dictionary, as we have already stated, the proverbs are arranged
in alphabetical order, according to the leading words, and are
consecutively numbered. But, in order to avoid repetition (as most of
the proverbs contain, at least, two leading words), the _subject words_
are used for the Dictionary, and the other principal words will be found
in the Index, with a numerical reference to the proverb. The great
advantage of this arrangement is, that if only one important word of a
proverb be remembered, that word can be turned to in the Dictionary,
and, if not found there, will certainly be in the Index. Nearly two
thousand of the leading words are thus indexed--enough to make it almost
impossible to miss finding what is wanted. This plan has also the
effect of bringing together the proverbs on kindred subjects, which is
often a matter of importance to writers, and is, moreover, most amusing
to those who only read the book to while away a leisure hour. Ready
reference is further facilitated in the Index by the addition of
associated words. If one word only had been given, the reader might have
had to refer to eleven proverbs before he found the one he required; as,
for example, in the case of _Dog_.

It may be convenient to state that the Dictionary has been compiled
principally from Ray's collection, first published in 1670. The
remainder of the proverbs have been collected from ancient and modern
literature; but some few of them will not be found in any other
published collection.

It only remains to remind the reader that this is a collection of
ENGLISH Proverbs only; and we may appropriately conclude our Preface
with a further extract from Disraeli's essay, wherein he very justly
remarks that "The experience of life will throw a perpetual freshness
over these short and simple texts; every day may furnish a new
commentary; and we may grow old and still find novelty in proverbs by
their perpetual application."




_A Dictionary of English Proverbs._


A

1. ABSENCE. Absence cools moderate passions, and inflames violent ones.

2. ABSENT. The absent are always at fault.

3. ABSENT. Long absent, soon forgotten.

4. ACHING TEETH. Who hath aching teeth, hath ill tenants.

5. ADVERSITY. Adversity makes a man wise, not rich.

6. ADVERSITY. Adversity tries friends.

7. ADVERSITY. Adversity flattereth no man.

8. ADVICE. Give neither advice nor salt until you are asked for it.

9. ADVICE. What every one asks, what every one gives, but what very few
take--advice.

10. ADVICE. In vain he craves advice who will not follow it.

11. ADVICE. Advice comes too late when a thing is done.

12. AFRAID OF WOUNDS. He that's afraid of wounds must not come nigh a
battle.

13. AFRAID. More afraid than hurt.

14. AGE. Age before honesty.

15. AGE (OLD). Old age is honourable.

16. AGREE. Two of a trade seldom agree.

17. AGREE. Agree, for law is costly.

18. AGUE.

     An ague in the spring,
     Is physic for a king.

19. AGUES. Agues come on horseback, but go away on foot.

20. AIR. A man cannot live by the air.

21. ALCHEMY. No alchemy like saving.

22. ALE. Good ale is meat, drink, and cloth.

23. ALE.

     He that buys land buys many stones,
     He that buys flesh buys many bones,
     He that buys eggs buys many shells,
     He that buys ale buys nothing else.

24. ALE-HOUSE. Every one has a penny to spend at a new ale-house.

25. ALL'S WELL. All's well that ends well.

26. ALL THINGS.

     No living man
     All things can.

27. ALMOST. Almost was never hanged.

28. ALMS. Steal the goose, and give the giblets in alms.

29. ANGER. Anger is short-lived in a good man.

30. ANGER. Keep from the anger of a great man.

31. ANGRY MEN. Angry men seldom want woe.

32. ANGRY. He that is angry without a cause must be pleased without
amends.

33. ANOTHER'S BURDEN. None knows the weight of another's burden.

34. APPLES.

     Apples, eggs, and nuts,
     One may eat after sluts.

35. APRIL. April and May are the keys of the year.

36. APRIL.

     When April blows his horn,
     It's both good for hay and corn.

37. APRIL. April borrows three days of March, and they are ill.

38. APRIL SHOWERS.

     March winds and April showers
     Bring forth May flowers.

39. ARGUS. Argus at home, but a mole abroad.

40. ASHAMED. Never be ashamed to eat your meat.

41. ASHES. Every man must eat a peck of ashes before he dies.

42. ASK. Ask but enough, and you may lower as you list.

43. ASK. Ask thy purse what thou shouldst buy.

44. ASKING. Lose nothing for asking.

45. ASS. The ass that brays most, eats least.

46. ASS. Every ass thinks himself worthy to stand with the king's
horses.

47. AUGUST.

     August dry and warm,
     Harvest doth no harm.

48. AUGUST.

     If the twenty-fourth of August be fair and clear,
     Then hope for a prosperous autumn that year.

49. AUGUST. A wet August never brings dearth.

50. AUTHOR. Like author, like book.


B

51. BACHELORS. Bachelors grin, but married men laugh till their hearts
ache.

52. BACHELORS' WIVES. Bachelors' wives and maids' children are always
well taught.

53. BAD. Where bad's the best, naught must be the choice.

54. BAD COMPANY. Better be alone than in bad company.

55. BAD DAY. A bad day never hath a good night.

56. BAD MARKET. He that cannot abide a bad market deserves not a good
one.

57. BAGPIPE. Bring not a bagpipe to a man in trouble.

58. BAGS. He is most loved that hath most bags.

59. BAIL. Be bail and pay for it.

60. BALANCE. The balance distinguishes not between gold and lead.

61. BALD HEAD. A bald head is soon shaven.

62. BANQUET. There's no great banquet but some fare ill.

63. BARBER'S CHAIR. Like a barber's chair, fit for every buttock.

64. BARBER. One barber shaves not so close but another finds work.

65. BAREFOOTED. Barefooted men should not tread on thorns.

66. BARE FOOT. Better a bare foot than no foot at all.

67. BARGAIN. Make the best of a bad bargain.

68. BARGAIN. A bargain is a bargain.

69. BARGAIN. At a great bargain make a great pause.

70. BARK. What! keep a dog and bark myself?

71. BARKERS. The greatest barkers are not always the sorest biters.

72. BARLEY.

     When the sloe-tree is as white as a sheet,
     Sow your barley, whether it be dry or wet.

73. BARLEYCORN. Sir John Barleycorn is the strongest knight.

74. BARLEY STRAW. Barley straw's good fodder when the cow gives water.

75. BARREL. You cannot know wine by the barrel.

76. BATCHELOR. Commend a wedded life, but keep thyself a batchelor.

77. BEAN. Every bean has its black.

78. BEANS. Sow beans in the mud, they'll grow like wood.

79. BEANS. Beans should blow before May doth go.

80. BEAR. A man may bear till his back breaks.

81. BEAR. Bear and forbear.

82. BEAR. Bear with evil and expect good.

83. BEAT. 'Tis easy to find a staff to beat a dog.

84. BEATEN. Better to be beaten than be in bad company.

85. BEATEN.

     A spaniel, a woman, and a walnut tree,
     The more they're beaten the better they be.

86. BEAUTY. Beauty buys no beef.

87. BEAUTY. Beauty is no inheritance.

88. BEAUTY. Beauty is but skin deep.

89. BED. As you make your bed so you must lie on it.

90. BED. He who lies long in bed his estate feels it.

91. BEES.

     A swarm of bees in May is worth a load of hay,
     But a swarm of bees in July is not worth a fly.

92. BEES. Where bees are there is honey.

93. BEFORE. He that hires the horse must ride before.

94. BEGGAR. Better be a beggar than a fool.

95. BEGGAR. A beggar can never be bankrupt.

96. BEGGAR. The beggar is never out of his way.

97. BEGGARS. Beggars must not be choosers.

98. BEGGARS. Beggars on horseback will ride to the devil.

99. BEGGARY. Trash and trumpery is the highway to beggary.

100. BEGGING. Begging is an ill trade on a fast-day.

101. BEGINNING. A good beginning makes a good ending.

102. BEGINNING. Such a beginning, such an end.

103. BEGIN WELL. Good to begin well; better to end well.

104. BEGUN. Well begun is half done.

105. BEHIND. When two ride together one must ride behind.

106. BELIEVE. You would make me believe the moon is made of green
cheese.

107. BELIEVE. Believe well and have well.

108. BELL. Fear not the loss of the bell more than the loss of the
steeple.

109. BEND. Bend the twig while it is young.

110. BENT. As the twig is bent the tree's inclined.

111. BEST. The best is cheapest.

112. BEST. The best lie is the worst.

113. BEST. Make the best of a bad bargain.

114. BEST DOG. Let the best dog leap the stile first.

115. BET. Any fool can bet.

116. BETTER. The better the day, the better the deed.

117. BEWARE. Beware of "Had I wist."

118. BIDDEN. Do as you are bidden and you'll never be to blame.

119. BIRCHEN TWIGS. Birchen twigs break no ribs.

120. BIRD. A bird in the hand is worth two in the bush.

121. BIRD. Every bird must hatch her own egg.

122. BIRD. One beats the bush and another catcheth the bird.

123. BIRDS. Birds of a feather flock together.

124. BIRD. The bird that can sing and will not sing, must be made to
sing.

125. BIRDS (SMALL). Even small birds must have meat.

126. BITE. If you cannot bite, never show your teeth.

127. BITES. He that bites on every weed must needs light on poison.

128. BIT. A bit in the morning is better than nothing all day.

129. BITTER BIRD. Thou art a bitter bird, said the raven to the
starling.

130. BLACK PLUM. A black plum is as sweet as a white.

131. BLAST.

     The sharper the blast,
     The shorter 'twill last.

132. BLIND. As blind as a bat.

133. BLIND. Who so blind as he that will not see?

134. BLIND MAN. A blind man would be glad to see it.

135. BLIND MAN. Like a treatise on light and colours by a blind man.

136. BLOOD. You cannot get blood out of a stone.

137. BLOT. 'Tis a blot on his escutcheon.

138. BLUSHING. Blushing is virtue's colour.

139. BLUSTERS. He who blusters without reason has most reason to
bluster.

140. BOAST. Great boast, small roast.

141. BOIL SNOW. Whether you boil snow or pound it, you will have but
water from it.

142. BONE. Give a dog a bone in his mouth, and you may kick him and he
can't bite.

143. BONE. I have a bone in my arm.

144. BONE. The nearer the bone the sweeter the meat.

145. BORN. He that is born to be hanged shall never be drowned.

146. BORROWED GARMENTS. Borrowed garments never fit well.

147. BOUGHT WIT. Bought wit is best.

148. BOUGHT WIT. Bought wit makes folk wise.

149. BOUND. They that are bound must obey.

150. BOW. A bow long bent at last waxeth weak.

151. BOWL. It is easy to bowl down hill.

152. BOYS. Boys will be boys.

153. BRAG. Brag's a good dog, but Holdfast is a better.

154. BRAG. Brag's a good dog, but that he hath lost his tail.

155. BRAG. Brag's a good dog if he be well set on; but he dare not bite.

156. BRAGGERS. Great braggers, little doers.

157. BRAIN. The brain that sows not corn, plants thistles.

158. BRAN. Much bran, little meal.

159. BREAD AND BUTTER.

     They that have no other meat,
     Bread and butter are glad to eat.

160. BREAKFAST. He who would have a hare for breakfast must hunt over
night.

161. BREAKING. The best horse needs breaking, and the best child needs
teaching.

162. BRED. That which is bred in the bone will never be out of the
flesh.

163. BREVITY. Brevity is the soul of wit.

164. BREW. As you brew, so shall you bake.

165. BRIBE. A bribe will enter without knocking.

166. BRIMMER. There is no deceit in a brimmer.

167. BROKEN LEG. A broken leg is not healed by a silk stocking.

168. BURDEN. A burden which one chooses is not felt.

169. BURDEN. The back is made for the burden.

170. BURDEN. No one knows the weight of another's burden.

171. BURDENS. The greatest burdens are not the gainfullest.

172. BURNT CHILD. A burnt child dreads the fire.

173. BUSINESS. Business is the salt of life.

174. BUSINESS. Every man as his business lies.

175. BUSH. A bad bush is better than the open field.

176. BUSY. Who more busy than they that have least to do.

177. BUTCHER. Better pay the butcher than the doctor.

178. BUTTER. Butter is gold in the morning, silver at noon, lead at
night.

179. BUTTER. Why, butter would not melt in his mouth!

180. BUTTER. What is a pound of butter amongst a kennel of hounds?

181. BUTTER. Once a year butter is in the cow's horn.

182. BUTTERED. He knows on which side his bread is buttered.

183. BUY. Do not buy a pig in a poke.

184. BUYER. Let the buyer look out for himself.

185. BUYS.

     Who buys hath need of a hundred eyes.
     Who sells hath need of one.


C

186. CAKE. You cannot eat your cake and have it.

187. CALM SEA. In a calm sea every man is a pilot.

188. CALM WEATHER. Calm weather in June sets corn in tune.

189. CAN. A man can do more than he can.

190. CANDLE. Burn not your candle at both ends at once.

191. CANDLEMAS. On Candlemas day you must have half your straw and half
your hay.

192. CANDLEMAS.

     If Candlemas day be fair and bright,
     Winter will have another flight;
     If on Candlemas day it be shower and rain,
     Winter is gone, and will not come again.

193. CANDLEMAS.

     When Candlemas day is come and gone,
     The snow lies on a hot stone.

194. CANDLEMAS DAY.

     The hind had as lief see his wife on the bier,
     As Candlemas day should be pleasant and clear.

195. CANDLEMAS DAY. On Candlemas day throw candle and candle-stick away.

196. CAP. If the cap fit, wear it.

197. CAPTAIN. Be captain of your own ship.

198. CARCASE. Where the carcase is, there will the eagles be gathered
together.

199. CARDS. Many can pack the cards that cannot play.

200. CARE. Care's no cure.

201. CARE. Care will kill a cat.

202. CARE. Take care of the pence, and the pounds will take care of
themselves.

203. CARE NOT. "Care not," would have.

204. CARRY. Don't run away with more than you can carry.

205. CARRYING COALS. Like carrying coals to Newcastle.

206. CASTLES. Tis easy to build castles in the air.

207. CASH. Rolling in cash he can't use, like a cat in a corn-bin.

208. CASTLE. An Englishman's house is his castle.

209. CAT.

     When the cat's away,
     The mice will play.

210. CAT. A cat may look at a king.

211. CAT. The cat is hungry when a crust contents her.

212. CAT. The cat sees not the mouse ever.

213. CATS. I'll keep no more cats than will catch mice.

214. CAT. A cat has nine lives, yet care will kill a cat.

215. CAT. When the cat winketh, little wots the mouse what the cat
thinketh.

216. CAT. Though the cat winks awhile, yet sure she is not blind.

217. CAT. A cat loves fish, but she's loth to wet her feet.

218. CATCH. Catch that catch may.

219. CAUSE. It's a bad cause that none dare speak in.

220. CAUTION. Those are wise who learn caution from their own
experience; but those are wiser who learn it from the experience of
others.

221. CERTAIN. There is nothing certain in this life but death and taxes!

222. CERTAINTY. Never quit certainty for hope.

223. CHAFF. I'm too old a bird to be caught by chaff.

224. CHALK. As like as chalk and cheese.

225. CHAMBER. The chamber of sickness is the chapel of devotion.

226. CHANCE. Look to the main chance.

227. CHANCE.

     He that leaves certainty and sticks to chance,
     When fools pipe he may dance.

228. CHANCETH. It chanceth in an hour that comes not in seven years.

229. CHANGE. Change of pasture makes fat calves.

230. CHARITABLE. The charitable give out at the door, and God puts in at
the window.

231. CHARITY. Charity begins at home.

232. CHASTISETH. He that chastiseth one, amendeth many.

233. CHEESE.

     Cheese it is a peevish elf,
     It digests all things but itself.

234. CHEESE. After cheese comes nothing.

235. CHEESE.

     If you would have a good cheese, and have'n old,
     You must turn'n seven times before he is cold.

236. CHERRY. A cherry year, a merry year.

237. CHICKENS. Count not your chickens before they are hatched.

238. CHIDING. Woe to the house where there is no chiding.

239. CHILD. Train up a child in the way he should go, and when he is old
he will not depart from it.

240. CHILD. A child may have too much of his mother's blessing.

241. CHILD'S PIG. Child's pig, but father's bacon.

242. CHILDREN. Children and fools speak the truth.

243. CHILDREN. Children and fools have merry lives.

244. CHILDREN. Children and chickens must be always picking.

245. CHILDREN. Children are poor men's riches.

246. CHILDREN. Children should hear, see, and say nothing.

247. CHILDREN. When children stand quiet they have done some harm.

248. CHILDREN. Children are certain cares, but very uncertain comforts.

249. CHILDREN. Children suck the mother when they are young, and the
father when they are old.

250. CHINK. So we have the chink, we'll bear the stink.

251. CHIP. A chip of the old block.

252. CHRISTMAS. Christmas comes but once a year.

253. CHRISTMAS. Green Christmas, white Easter.

254. CHRISTMAS. They talk of Christmas so long that it comes.

255. CHRISTMAS DAY.

     If Christmas Day on a Monday be,
     A great winter that year you will see.

256. CHURCH. Where God hath His church the devil will have his chapel.

257. CHURCH. The nearer the church the farther from God.

258. CHURCHES. Pater-noster built churches, and Our Father pulls them
down.

259. CIVIL WORDS. Civil words cost nothing, and go a long way.

260. CLAW. Claw me, and I will claw you.

261. CLEAR. As clear as mud.

262. CLERK. 'Tis the clerk makes the justice.

263. CLIMB. Climb not too high, lest the fall be the greater.

264. CLIMBED. Who never climbed, never fell.

265. CLIMBERS. Hasty climbers have sudden falls.

266. CLOAK. Have not the cloak to make when it begins to rain.

267. CLOAK. Though the sun shines, leave not your cloak at home.

268. CLOCK. The clock goes as it pleases the clerk.

269. CLOSE MOUTH. A close mouth catcheth no flies.

270. CLOTHES. It is good keeping his clothes who is going to swim.

271. CLOUD. Every cloud hath a silver lining.

272. CLOUDS. Clouds that the sun builds up darken him.

273. CLOUDS.

     When the clouds are on the hills,
     They'll come down by the mills.

274. CLOUDS. After clouds comes clear weather.

275. CLOUDY. Cloudy mornings turn to clear evenings.

276. CLOVER. He is in clover.

277. CLOWN. Even a clown clings to his cloak when it rains.

278. COAT. Cut your coat according to your cloth.

279. COAT. It's not the gay coat that makes the gentleman.

280. COBBLE.

     They that can cobble and clout,
     Shall have work when others go without.

281. COBBLER. Let not the cobbler go beyond his last.

282. COBBLER'S WIFE. Who goes worse shod than the cobbler's wife?

283. COCK.

     If the cock moult before the hen,
     We shall have weather thick and thin;
     But if the hen moult before the cock,
     We shall have weather hard as a block.

284. COCK. The cock crows and the hen goes.

285. COCK. Every cock is proud on his own dunghill.

286. COIN. Where coin's not common, commons must be scant.

287. COIN. Much coin much care.

288. COLD APRIL. A cold April a barn will fill.

289. COLD MAY.

     A cold May and a windy
     Makes a full barn and a findy.

290. COLDEST FLINT. In the coldest flint there is hot fire.

291. COLOURS. It's an ill battle where the devil carries the colours.

292. COLT. When you ride a young colt see your saddle be well girt.

293. COMPANY. Two's company and three's none.

294. COMPANY. Tell me what company you keep, and I will tell you who you
are.

295. COMPANY. It's good to have company in trouble.

296. COMPANY.

     Company in distress,
     Makes trouble less.

297. COMPANION. A merry companion on the road is as good as a nag.

298. COMPANION. There's no companion like a penny.

299. COMPARISONS. Comparisons are odious.

300. COMPLAIN. They complain wrongfully of the sea, who twice suffer
shipwreck.

301. COMPLEXION. Cold of complexion, good of condition.

302. CONCEALS. A woman conceals what she knows not.

303. CONFESSION. A generous confession disarms slander.

304. CONFESSION. Confession of a fault makes half amends for it.

305. CONFESSION. Open confession is good for the soul.

306. CONQUEST. It is no small conquest to overcome yourself.

307. CONSCIENCE. A clear conscience is a sure card.

308. CONSTANT DROPPING. Constant dropping wears the stone.

309. CONSUMED. When all is consumed repentance comes too late.

310. CONTENT. Content is the true philosopher's stone.

311. CONTENTED. A contented mind is a continual feast.

312. CONTENTED. He that hath nothing is not contented.

313. CONTENTED. He may well be contented who needs neither borrow nor
flatter.

314. CONTENTED. People are sometimes better contented full than fasting.

315. CONTENTMENT. The greatest wealth is contentment with a little.

316. CORN.

     Look at your corn in May,
     You'll come weeping away;
     Look at the same in June
     You'll come home in another tune.

317. CORN. Corn is cleansed with the wind, and the soul with chastening.

318. COTTAGE. I'll not change a cottage in possession for a kingdom in
reversion.

319. COUNSEL. Counsel is never out of date.

320. COUNSELS. Counsels in wine seldom prosper.

321. COUNSEL. In wiving and thriving men should take counsel of all the
world.

322. COUNSEL. Three may keep counsel, if two be away.

323. COUNSELLED. He that will not be counselled cannot be helped.

324. COUNT. Count not your chickens before they be hatched.

325. COUNTRY. In every country the sun riseth in the morning.

326. COUNTRY. You must go into the country to hear what news at London.

327. COUPLE. Every couple is not a pair.

328. COURT. A friend at court is better than a penny in the purse.

329. COURT. Far from court, far from care.

330. COURTS. Courts have no almanacks.

331. COURTESY. Less of your courtesy, and more of your purse.

332. COURTESY. Courtesy on one side never lasts long.

333. COURTSHIP. Men dream in courtship but in wedlock wake.

334. COUSIN. Call me cousin; but cozen me not.

335. COVERLET. Stretch your legs according to your coverlet.

336. COVERS. He covers me with his wings, and bites me with his bill.

337. COVET. Covet nothing over much.

338. COVETOUSNESS. Covetousness brings nothing home.

339. COW. Many a good cow hath had a bad calf.

340. COW. Look to the cow, and the sow, and the wheat mow, and all will
be well enow.

341. COWARDS. Cowards are always cruel.

342. COWARDICE. Cowardice is afraid to be known or seen.

343. CRABS. The greatest crabs are not always the best meat.

344. CRACK. He must crack the nut that would eat the kernel.

345. CRAFT. Craft bringeth nothing home.

346. CRAFTS. Of all crafts, to be an honest man is the master-craft.

347. CRAFTY. Crafty evasions save not the truth.

348. CRAZY SHIP. To a crazy ship all winds are contrary.

349. CREAKING GATE. A creaking gate hangs longest on its hinges.

350. CREAKS. The worst wheel of a cart creaks most.

351. CREDIT. Credit lost is a Venice glass broken.

352. CREDITORS. Creditors have better memories than debtors.

353. CREEP. First creep and then go.

354. CRITICS. Critics are like brushers of other men's clothes.

355. CROOKED. A crooked tree will have a crooked shadow.

356. CROOKED. Crooked logs make straight fires.

357. CROSS. No cross, no crown.

358. CROSS. Every cross has its inscription.

359. CROSSES. Crosses are ladders for getting to heaven.

360. CROSSES. Crosses are ladders that lead to heaven.

361. CROW. The crow thinks her own bird fairest.

362. CROW. A crow is never the whiter for washing herself often.

363. CROWS. It never goes well when the hen crows.

364. CRUELTY. Cruelty is a tyrant always attended by fear.

365. CRUELTY. Cruelty is a devil's delight.

366. CRUMBS. Where are the crumbs there are the chickens.

367. CRY. Don't cry out before you're hurt.

368. CRY. Great cry and little wool.

369. CUCKOO.

     When the cuckoo comes to the bare thorn,
     Sell your cow and buy your corn,
     But when she comes to a full bit,
     Sell your corn, and buy your sheep.

370. CURED. What cannot be cured must be endured.

371. CURSES. Curses are like chickens, they come home to roost.

372. CUSTOM. Custom is second nature.

373. CUSTOM. Once a use and ever a custom.

374. CUSTOM. Custom makes anything easy.

375. CUSTOM (BAD). A bad custom is like a good cake, better broken than
kept.

376. CUT. Cut and come again.

377. CUT. No cut like unkindness.

378. CUT. I had not cut my wise teeth.

379. CUTS. Desperate cuts must have desperate cures.


D

380. DANCE. No longer pipe, no longer dance.

381. DANCES. He dances well to whom fortune pipes.

382. DANCING. They love dancing well that dance among thorns.

383. DANGER. The danger's past, and God's forgotten.

384. DAINTY DOGS. Dainty dogs may have to eat dirty puddings.

385. DARK. It is as good to be in the dark as without light.

386. DARK MAN. A dark man's a jewel in a fair woman's eye.

387. DARK. He that gropes in the dark finds that he would not.

388. DAUGHTER.

     My son is my son till he marries a wife,
     But my daughter's my daughter all the days of her life.

389. DAUGHTER.

     He that would the daughter win,
     Must with the mother first begin.

390. DAYLIGHT. Daylight will peep through a small hole.

391. DEAD. As dead as a door-nail.

392. DEAD MAN'S SHOES. He that waits for a dead man's shoes may go long
enough barefoot.

393. DEAF. There are none so deaf as those who will not hear.

394. DEAF MAN. Tell that tale to a deaf man.

395. DEARTH. It's a wicked thing to make a dearth one's garner.

396. DEATH. Death keeps no calendar.

397. DEATH. Death is deaf and hears no denial.

398. DEATH. Nothing is surer than death.

399. DEATH. After death the doctor.

400. DEBT. Debt is the worst kind of poverty.

401. DEBT. Out of debt, out of danger.

402. DEEPEST WATER. In the deepest water is the best fishing.

403. DEEDS. Deeds are fruits, words are but leaves.

404. DEEDS. A life spent worthily should be measured by deeds--not
years.

405. DELAYS. Delays are dangerous.

406. DEPTH. Never venture out of your depth until you can swim.

407. DESERT. Desert and reward seldom keep company.

408. DESERVE. First deserve and then desire.

409. DESIRES. Desires are nourished by delays.

410. DESPISES. What one man despises, another craves.

411. DESTINY. Hanging and wiving go by destiny.

412. DEVIL. Talk of the devil and he'll be sure to appear.

413. DEVIL. He that hath shipped the devil must make the best of him.

414. DEVIL. Give the devil his due.

415. DEVIL. Make not the devil blacker than he is.

416. DEVIL. He needs must go that the devil drives.

417. DEVIL. One must sometimes hold a candle to the devil.

418. DEVIL. The devil is not always at one door.

419. DEVIL.

     The Devil Was Sick, the Devil a Monk Would Be;
     The Devil Grew Well, the Devil a Monk Was He.

420. DEW. St. Bartholomew brings the cold dew.

421. DIE. Never say die.

422. DIE. Young men may die, old men must.

423. DILIGENCE. Diligence is a good patrimony.

424. DILIGENCE. Diligence is the mother of good fortune.

425. DINNER. After dinner sit awhile, after supper walk a mile.

426. DINNER. He who would enjoy his friend's dinner should not look into
the kitchen.

427. DISTRESS. Two in distress make sorrows less.

428. DISCOURSE. Sweet discourse makes short days and nights.

429. DISCREET. Discreet women have neither eyes nor ears.

430. DISCRETION. An ounce of discretion is worth a pound of wit.

431. DISEASE. Disease is oft the tax of pleasure.

432. DISEASE. To know the disease is half the cure.

433. DISH. The first dish pleaseth all.

434. DO. Do as you would be done by.

435. DO. We must do as we may, if we cannot do as we would.

436. DOCK. In dock, out nettle.

437. DOCTOR. A doctor and a clown know more than a doctor alone.

438. DOCTOR. An old doctor, a young lawyer.

439. DOG. Every dog has his day.

440. DOG. A good dog deserves a good bone.

441. DOG. It's a bad dog that deserves not a crust.

442. DOGS BARK. Dogs bark before they bite.

443. DONE. If you wish a thing done, go; if not, send.

444. DOOMSDAY. A thousand pounds and a pottle of hay is all one thing at
doomsday.

445. DOOR. When one door shuts another opens.

446. DO WELL. Do well, and have well.

447. DOWN. He that's down, down with him.

448. DRAW. You may draw him which way you will, with a twine thread.

449. DROWNING MAN. A drowning man will catch at a straw.

450. DRINK. Drink water like an ox, wine like a king of Spain.

451. DRINK. He who drinks when he is not dry, will be dry when he has no
drink.

452. DRIVE. Drive not a second nail till the first is clenched.

453. DROPS. Many drops make a shower.

454. DROUGHT.

     If the ash before the oak comes out,
     There has been, or there will be drought.

455. DROWNED. Pour not water on a drowned mouse.

456. DRUNK. Ever drunk, ever dry.

457. DRUNKEN. A drunken night makes a cloudy morning.

458. DRUNKEN FOLK. Drunken folk often speak truth.

459. DRUNKENNESS. What soberness conceals, drunkenness reveals.

460. DRY BREAD. Dry bread at home is better than roast beef abroad.

461. DRY COUGH. A dry cough is the trumpeter of death.

462. DRY MAY.

     A dry May and a dripping June,
     Does surely bring all things in tune.


E

463. EARLY.

     Early to bed, and early to rise,
     Makes a man healthy, wealthy, and wise.

464. EARLY. Early sow, early mow.

465. EARLY BIRD. 'Tis the early bird catches the worm.

466. EARS. Little pitchers have long ears.

467. EARS. Walls have ears.

468. EARS. Wider ears and a shorter tongue.

469. EASE. A pennyworth of ease is worth a penny.

470. EASE. Think of ease, but work on.

471. EASILY DONE. That which is easily done is soon believed.

472. EAT. Live not to eat, but eat to live.

473. EAT. Eat a bit before you drink.

474. EAT.

     Eat at pleasure,
     Drink by measure.

475. EATING. Eating and drinking takes away one's appetite.

476. EDGED TOOLS. It is ill meddling with edged tools.

477. EEL. You cannot hide an eel in a sack.

478. EGGS. Don't put all your eggs into one basket.

479. EGG-SHELL. 'Tis hard to sail o'er the sea in an egg-shell.

480. ELBOW. Rub your sore eye with your elbow.

481. ELBOW GREASE. Give it plenty of elbow grease.

482. EMPTY HOUSE. Better an empty house than a bad tenant.

483. EMPTY PURSE. An empty purse fills the face with wrinkles.

484. EMPTY PURSE. That's but an empty purse that's full of other men's
money.

485. EMPTY VESSELS. Empty vessels make the greatest sound.

486. END. Everything hath an end, and a pudding hath two.

487. ENDURETH. He that endureth is not overcome.

488. ENGLAND. England is the Paradise of women.

489. ENGLISHMAN. An Englishman's house is his castle.

490. ENOUGH. Enough is as good as a feast.

491. ENOUGH. Enough and to spare is too much.

492. ENOUGH. There's never enough where nothing's left.

493. ENVIED. Better be envied than pitied.

494. ENVY. Envy never enriched any man.

495. EPITAPH. He lies like an epitaph.

496. ERR. To err is human; to forgive divine.

497. ERRAND. Send a wise man on an errand and say nothing to him.

498. ESCAPES. 'Tis a hard battle where none escapes.

499. ESTATE. He that throws away his estate with his hands, goes
afterwards to pick it upon his feet.

500. ESTEEMS. He that knows himself best, esteems himself least.

501. EVENING.

     An evening red and a morning grey,
     Is a sign of a fair day.

502. EVERYBODY. He had need rise betimes that would please everybody.

503. EVERYBODY'S BUSINESS. Everybody's business is nobody's business.

504. EVERY MAN. Every man for himself, and God for us all.

505. EVERY TUB. Let every tub stand on its own bottom.

506. EVIL. Evil communications corrupt good manners.

507. EVIL. If you must have an evil, choose a little one.

508. EVIL. That which is evil is soon learnt.

509. EVIL.

     Evil is wrought by want of thought,
     As well as want of heart.

510. EVIL NAME. The evil wound is cured, but not the evil name.

511. EVIL GOTTEN. Evil gotten, evil spent.

512. EVIL GRAIN. Of evil grain no good seed can come.

513. EVILS. Of two evils choose the lesser.

514. EXAMPLE. Example teaches more than precept.

515. EXCHANGE. Exchange is no robbery.

516. EXCUSE. A bad excuse is better than none at all.

517. EXPENSES. Proportion your expenses to what you have, not to what
you expect.

518. EXPERIENCE. Experience is a dear school, but it is the only one we
are apt to learn in.

519. EXPERIENCE. Experience is the mistress of fools.

520. EXTREMES. Extremes seldom last long.

521. EXTREMES. Extremes meet.

522. EYE. Better one eye than quite blind.

523. EYE. What the eye sees not, the heart rues not.

524. EYE. You should never touch your eye but with your elbow.

525. EYE. What the eye does not see the heart does not grieve for.

526. EYE-WITNESS. One eye-witness is better than ten hearsays.


F

527. FACE. Her face was her fortune.

528. FACT. A single fact is worth a ship-load of argument.

529. FAINT HEART. Faint heart never won a fair lady.

530. FAINT PRAISE. Faint praise is disparagement.

531. FAIR AND FOOLISH.

     Fair and foolish, black and proud,
     Long and lazy, little and loud.

532. FAIR AND SOFTLY. Fair and softly go far in a day.

533. FAIR FACES. Fair faces need no paint.

534. FAIR FACE. A fair face may hide a foul heart.

535. FAIR FEATHERS. Fair feathers make fair fowls.

536. FAITH. Love asks faith, and faith asks firmness.

537. FALL. One may sooner fall than rise.

538. FALL. If a man once fall, all will tread on him.

539. FALLS. When the tree falls every man runs with his hatchet.

540. FALLING. Keeping from falling is better than helping up.

541. FALSE REPORT. A false report rides post.

542. FAMILIARITY. Familiarity breeds contempt.

543. FAMINE.

     After a famine in the stall,
     Comes a famine in the hall.

544. FAMINE. Under water famine, under snow bread.

545. FAMINE. A famine in England begins at the horse-manger.

546. FANCY. Fancy passes beauty.

547. FANCY. Fancy goes a long way.

548. FANCY. Fancy may bolt bran and think it flour.

549. FARE WORSE. You may go farther and fare worse.

550. FASHION. As good to be out of the world as out of the fashion.

551. FAST BIND. Fast bind, fast find.

552. FAT HOG. Every one basteth the fat hog, while the lean one burneth.

553. FAULT. Every one puts his fault on the times.

554. FAULT. A fault once denied is twice committed.

555. FAULT-FINDERS. Fault-finders should be fault-menders.

556. FAULTS. Every one's faults are not written on their foreheads.

557. FAULTS. Every man hath his faults.

558. FAULTS. God send me a friend that may tell me my faults; if not, an
enemy, he will be sure to.

559. FAULTY. The faulty stands on his guard.

560. FEAST. A feast is not made of mushrooms only.

561. FEAST-MAKING. Merry is the feast-making until we come to the
reckoning.

562. FEASTS. Fools make feasts, and wise men eat them.

563. FEATHERS. Fine feathers make fine birds.

564. FEATHER. Feather by feather the goose is plucked.

565. FEBRUARY. February makes a bridge, and March breaks it.

566. FEBRUARY.

     February fill dike, be it black or be it white;
     But if it be white, it's the better to like.

567. FEED SPARINGLY. Feed sparingly, and defy the physician.

568. FEET.

     Stretch not your feet
     Beyond the sheet.

569. FELLOWSHIP. Love and lordship like no fellowship.

570. FETTERS. No man loves his fetters, though of gold.

571. FEW FRIENDS. Have but few friends, though many acquaintances.

572. FEW WORDS.

     Where hearts are true
     Few words will do.

573. FIDDLER. The fifer don't pay a fiddler.

574. FIDDLER.

     Let not the fiddler play the fife,
     Nor fifer play the fiddle.

575. FIDDLER'S FARE. Fiddler's fare; meat, drink, and money.

576. FIELDS. Fields have eyes, and woods have ears.

577. FINGER. He wants to have a finger in every pie.

578. FIRST BLOW. The first blow is half the battle.

579. FIRST COME. First come, first served.

580. FIRE AND WATER. Fire and water are good servants but bad masters.

581. FIRE. Well may he smell of fire whose gown burneth.

582. FISH. He that would catch fish must not mind getting wet.

583. FISH. 'Tis good fish if it were but caught.

584. FISH. The best fish are near the bottom.

585. FISH. I have other fish to fry.

586. FISH. Make not fish of one, and flesh of another.

587. FISH. Fish are not to be caught by a birdcall.

588. FISH (GOOD). There's as good fish in the sea as were ever caught.

589. FISHES' MOUTH.

     When the wind's in the south,
     It blows the bait into the fishes' mouth.

590. FISHETH ON. He fisheth on that catcheth one.

591. FISHING. It's good fishing in troubled waters.

592. FITS. Every shoe fits not every foot.

593. FIVE.

     He's up at five,
     And he will thrive.

594. FLAX. Get thy spindle and thy distaff ready, and God will send thee
flax.

595. FLAY. No man can flay a stone.

596. FLEECETH. Where every hand fleeceth, the sheep go naked.

597. FLOOD. A May flood never did good.

598. FLOWERS. Flowers are the pledge of fruit.

599. FLOURISH. It is one thing to flourish and another to fight.

600. FLYING. No flying without wings.

601. FOLLIES. Happy is he who knows his follies in his youth.

602. FOOL. No one is a fool always; every one sometimes.

603. FOOL. A fool may ask more questions in half an hour than a wise man
can answer in seven years.

604. FOOL. A fool may give a wise man counsel.

605. FOOL. One fool makes many.

606. FOOL. Every man is either a fool or a physician after thirty years
of age.

607. FOOL (OLD). An old fool is the worst of fools.

608. FOOL. Better it is to meet a bear bereaved of her whelps, than a
fool in his folly.

609. FOOL. A fool is fulsome.

610. FOOL THINKS. As the fool thinks, so the bell chinks.

611. FOOLS. Fools set stools for wise folk to stumble at.

612. FOOL'S BOLT. A fool's bolt is soon shot.

613. FOOLS BUILD. Fools build houses, and wise men buy them.

614. FORBEARANCE. Forbearance is no acquittance.

615. FORBIDDEN FRUIT. Forbidden fruit is sweet.

616. FORCED FRUITS. Forced fruits fail in flavour.

617. FORECAST. Forecast is better than work hard.

618. FOREGO.

     Forego, forget, forgive,
     Then happy you shall live.

619. FOREMOST DOG. The foremost dog catches the hare.

620. FOREWARNED. Forewarned is forearmed.

621. FORGET. To forget a wrong is the best revenge.

622. FORGIVE. Forgive and forget.

623. FORGOTTEN. Eaten bread is soon forgotten.

624. FORTUNE. Fortune favours the brave.

625. FORTUNE. Every man is the architect of his fortune.

626. FORTUNE. Change of fortune is the lot of life.

627. FORTUNE. Better a fortune in her than on her.

628. FORTUNE. When fortune smiles take the advantage.

629. FORTUNE KNOCKS. Fortune knocks once at least at every man's gate.

630. FOUL HANDS. Foul hands befoul all they touch.

631. FOUR FARTHINGS. Four farthings and a thimble make a tailor's pocket
jingle.

632. FOX. The fox knows much, but more he that catcheth him.

633. FOX. A fox should not be of the jury at a goose trial.

634. FOX. When the fox preaches, beware of your geese.

635. FOXES. Foxes, when they cannot reach the grapes, say they are not
ripe.

636. FOX RUNS. Though the fox runs the chicken hath wings.

637. FRET.

     Two things you won't fret o'er,
     If you're a wise man--
     The thing you can't help,
     And the thing that you can.

638. FRIDAY. He that sings on Friday shall weep on Sunday.

639. FRIDAY.

     As the Friday, so the Sunday,
     As the Sunday, so the week.

640. FRIDAY'S SAIL. Friday's sail, sure to fail.

641. FRIEND. A friend is not so soon gotten as lost.

642. FRIEND. A friend in need is a friend indeed.

643. FRIEND. He loseth nothing who keeps God for his friend.

644. FRIEND. Make not thy friend too cheap to thee, nor thyself to thy
friend.

645. FRIENDS.

     In time of prosperity friends will be plenty,
     In time of adversity, not one among twenty.

646. FRIENDS. Save me from my friends.

647. FRIENDS. All are not friends that speak us fair.

648. FRIENDSHIP. Love and lordship never like friendship.

649. FROST. What God will, no frost can kill.

650. FROSTS. So many frosts in March, so many in May.

651. FRUIT.

     If you would fruit have,
     You must bring the leaf to the grave.

652. FRUIT. Such as the tree is, such is the fruit.

653. FRUIT. If you would enjoy the fruit, pluck not the flower.

654. FRUGALITY. Frugality makes an easy chair for old age.

655. FRUGALITY. Frugality is an estate.

656. FRYING-PAN. Out of the frying-pan into the fire.

657. FUEL. Take away fuel, take away flame.

658. FULL PURSE. A full purse makes the mouth to speak.

659. FULL PURSE. A full purse never lacketh friends.

660. FURZE.

     Under the furze is hunger and cold.
     Under the broom is silver and gold.


G

661. GAINS. No gains without pains.

662. GALLED HORSE. Touch a galled horse, and he will wince.

663. GAPETH.

     He that gapeth until he be fed
     Well may he gape until he be dead.

664. GARDEN. Many things grow in the garden that were never planted
there.

665. GARDENING.

     This rule in gardening never forget,
     To sow dry and set wet.

666. GARLAND. One flower makes no garland.

667. GEMS. Gems must not be valued by what they are set in.

668. GENTILITY. Gentility without ability is worse than plain beggary.

669. GENTLE STROKES. Gentle strokes make the sweetest harmony.

670. GET.

     Get what you can, and what you get, hold,
     'Tis the stone which will turn your lead into gold.

671. GIFT HORSE. Look not a gift horse in the mouth.

672. GIFT. A gift with a kind countenance is a double gift.

673. GIVE. To give and keep there is need of wit.

674. GIVETH. He giveth twice who gives in a trice.

675. GIVING.

     Giving to the poor
     Increaseth your store.

676. GLADNESS. A man of gladness seldom falls into madness.

677. GLASS. What your glass tells you will not be told by counsel.

678. GLASS.

     Who loves his glass without a G,
     Take away L and that is he.

679. GLASS HOUSES. Those who live in glass houses should not throw
stones.

680. GLASSES. The more women look in their glasses, the less they look
to their houses.

681. GLITTERS. All that glitters is not gold.

682. GNATS. Men strain at gnats, and swallow camels!

683. GO. If you want a thing done, go; if not, send.

684. GO ABOUT. Better go about than fall into the ditch.

685. GOD. God sends meat, and the devil sends cooks.

686. GOD. One God, no more; but friends good store.

687. GODFATHERS. When the child is christened, you may have godfathers
enough.

688. GOD WILLS. When God wills, all winds bring rain.

689. GOLD. A man may buy gold too dear.

690. GOLD. Gold alone makes not prosperity.

691. GOLD. As good as gold.

692. GOLD. Gold goes in at any gate, except Heaven's.

693. GOLD.

     No lock will hold
     'Gainst the power of gold.

694. GOLDEN. We must not look for a golden life in an iron age.

695. GOLD DUST. Gold dust blinds all eyes.

696. GOOD. Do all the good you talk of; but talk not of all the good you
do.

697. GOOD. Good and quickly seldom meet.

698. GOOD. No man knows better what good is than he that has an endured
evil.

699. GOOD. Though good be good yet better carries it.

700. GOOD CHEER. When good cheer is lacking our friends will be packing.

701. GOOD WORD. A good word is as soon said as an ill one.

702. GOOD COUNSEL. Good counsel never comes too late.

703. GOOD FRIEND. He's a good friend that speaks well of us behind our
backs.

704. GOOD HARVESTS. Good harvests make men prodigal, bad ones provident.

705. GOOD MAXIM. A good maxim is never out of season.

706. GOOD MONEY. It is no use throwing good money after bad.

707. GOOD NAME.

     The wife that expects to have a good name
       Is always at home as if she were lame,
     And the maid that is honest her chiefest delight
       Is still to be doing from morning to night.

708. GOODS. A man may lose his goods for want of demanding them.

709. GOOD THINGS. God reacheth us good things with our own hands.

710. GOOD THING. One can never have too much of a good thing.

711. GOOD TURNS. One never loseth by doing good turns.

712. GOOD TURN. One good turn deserves another.

713. GOOD WORDS.

     Good words without deeds
     Are rushes and reeds.

714. GOWN. The gown is hers who wears it, and the world is his who
enjoys it.

715. GRASP. Grasp no more than thy hand will hold.

716. GRAIN. Never split timber against the grain.

717. GRASP. Grasp all, lose all.

718. GRASS. March grass never did good.

719. GRASS.

     If the grass grow in Janiveer,
     It grows the worse for't all the year.

720. GRASS. While the grass grows the steed starves.

721. GRASS. Grass grows not upon the highway.

722. GRAVES. We shall lie all alike in our graves.

723. GREAT DOWRY. A great dowry is a bed full of troubles.

724. GREAT MARKS. Great marks are soonest hit.

725. GREAT ONES. There would be no great ones if there were no little.

726. GREAT SHIP. A great ship needs deep waters.

727. GREEN WOOD. Green wood makes a hot fire.

728. GREEN WOUND. A green wound is soon healed.

729. GREEN WINTER. A green winter makes a fat churchyard.

730. GREY HAIRS. Gray hairs are death's blossoms.

731. GRIEF. Grief pent up will burst the heart.

732. GRIND. The mill cannot grind with the water that is past.

733. GUEST. An unbidden guest must bring his own stool with him.

734. GUEST. 'Tis an ill guest that never drinks to his host.

735. GUILTY CONSCIENCE. A guilty conscience needs no accuser.


H

736. HAIL. Hail brings frost in the tail.

737. HALF A LOAF. Half a loaf is better than no bread.

738. HALF HANGED. Better be half hanged than ill wed.

739. HAND-SAW. A hand-saw is a good thing, but not to shave with.

740. HAND-SAW. He knows not a hawk from a hand-saw.

741. HANDSOME. He who is not handsome at twenty, nor strong at thirty,
nor wise at forty, nor rich at fifty, will never be handsome, strong,
rich, or wise.

742. HANGED. He who is born to be hanged will never be drowned.

743. HANGED. One may as well be hanged for a sheep as a lamb.

744. HANGING. There are many ways of killing a dog beside hanging him.

745. HAPPY.

     Happy is the bride the sun shines on,
     And the corpse the rain rains on.

746. HARE. Where we least think, there goeth the hare away.

747. HARDLY EVER. "Hardly ever" saves many a lie.

748. HARE. Little dogs start the hare, but great ones catch it.

749. HARE SKIN. Sell not the hare's skin before you have caught him.

750. HARM. Harm watch, harm catch.

751. HARMS. Wise men learn by others' harms, fools by their own.

752. HARVEST. He that hath a good harvest may be content with some
thistles.

753. HASTE. More haste worse speed.

754. HASTE. Haste trips up its own heels.

755. HASTE. Over haste makes certain waste.

756. HASTE. Haste over nothing but catching fleas.

757. HASTY MEN. Hasty men never lack woe.

758. HASTY RESOLUTIONS. Hasty resolutions seldom speed well.

759. HAT. Pull down your hat on the wind side.

760. HATCHET. When the tree is down, every one runs with his hatchet.

761. HAVEN. 'Tis safe riding in a good haven.

762. HAY. Make hay while the sun shines.

763. HEAD. Man is the head, but woman turns it.

764. HEAD. He that hath no head, needs no hat.

765. HEAD. Better be the head of an ass than the tail of a horse.

766. HEADACHE. When the head aches, all the body is the worse.

767. HEALED. A man is not so soon healed as hurt.

768. HEALETH. God healeth, and the physician hath the thanks.

769. HEALTH. Health is better than wealth.

770. HEART. What the heart thinketh, the tongue speaketh.

771. HEARTS. Hearts may agree though heads differ.

772. HEDGE. Where the hedge is lowest, men commonly leap over.

773. HEDGE. A low hedge is easily leapt over.

774. HEDGE.

     A hedge between
     Keeps friendship green.

775. HEDGES. Hedges have eyes, and walls have ears.

776. HEED. Good take heed doth surely speed.

777. HEELS. One pair of heels is often worth two pair of hands.

778. HEN CROWS. It is a sad house where the hen crows louder than the
cock.

779. HID. Love and a cough cannot be hid.

780. HIDE. You cannot hide an eel in a sack.

781. HIDE. Hide nothing from thy minister, physician, and lawyer.

782. HIGH PLACES. High places have their precipices.

783. HIGH WINDS. High winds blow on high hills.

784. HIMSELF. Every man is best known to himself.

785. HIMSELF. He is not wise that is not wise for himself.

786. HIND. To fright a hind is not the way to catch her.

787. HINDERMOST DOG. The hindermost dog may catch the hare.

788. HOBBY. Happy is the man that has a hobby.

789. HOBBY-HORSE. Every man has his hobby-horse.

790. HOG. A hog in armour is still but a hog.

791. HOLLOA. Do not holloa till you are out of the wood.

792. HOME. Home is home, be it ever so homely.

793. HONESTY. Honesty is the best policy; but he who acts on this
principle is not an honest man.

794. HONESTY. A man never surfeits of too much honesty.

795. HONOUR. Better poor with honour than rich with shame.

796. HONOUR. Honour and ease are seldom bed-fellows.

797. HONOUR. Where honour ceaseth, there knowledge decreaseth.

798. HOOP. He giveth one knock on the hoop, and another on the barrel.

799. HOPE. Hope deferred maketh the heart sick.

800. HOPE. Hope humbles more than despair.

801. HOPE. Hope is a good breakfast, but a bad supper.

802. HOPE. If it were not for hope, the heart would break.

803. HOPS.

     Till St. James's day be come and gone,
     You may have hops, or you may have none.

804. HORN. All are not hunters that blow the horn.

805. HORSE. A good horse cannot be of a bad colour.

806. HORSE. A good horse often wants a good spur.

807. HORSE. 'Tis an ill horse will not carry his own provender.

808. HORSE. One man may lead a horse to water, but fifty cannot make him
drink.

809. HOT LOVE. Hot love is soon cold.

810. HOT MAY. A hot May makes a fat churchyard.

811. HOUNDS. Hold not with the hounds and run with the hare.

812. HOUSE.

     He that buys a house ready wrought,
     Hath many a pin and nail for nought.

813. HOUSE. Better one's house too little one day, than too big all the
year round.

814. HOUSEHOLDERS. Wishers and woulders are never good householders.

815. HOUSEKEEPER. A noble housekeeper needs no doors.

816. HUMOUR. Every man has his humour.

817. HUMOURS. The stillest humours are always the worst.

818. HUNDRED YEARS. It is all one a hundred years hence.

819. HUNG. As well be hung for a sheep as a lamb.

820. HUNGER. Hunger costs little; daintiness much.

821. HUNGER. Hunger will break through stone walls.

822. HUNGER. Hunger makes short devotion.

823. HUNGER. Hunger makes hard bones sweet beans.

824. HUNGER. Hunger is the finest sauce.

825. HUNGRY FLIES. Hungry flies bite sore.

826. HUNGRY HORSE. A hungry horse makes a clean manger.

827. HUNGRY MAN. A hungry man, an angry man.

828. HUNGRY MEN. Hungry men think the cook lazy.

829. HUNGRY MEN. Bitter is sweet to hungry men.

830. HUSBAND. Be a good husband, and you will get a penny to spend, a
penny to lend, and a penny for a friend.

831. HUSBAND. In the husband wisdom, in the wife gentleness.


I

832. IDLE BRAIN. An idle brain is the devil's workshop.

833. IDLE FOLK. Idle folk have the least leisure.

834. IDLE FOLK. Idle folk take the most pains.

835. IDLE. A young man idle, an old man needy.

836. IDLE. Better be idle than ill employed.

837. IDLENESS. Idleness is the key of beggary.

838. IDLENESS. Of idleness comes no goodness.

839. IDLENESS. Idleness is the root of all evil.

840. IDLENESS. Idleness must thank itself if it goes barefoot.

841. IGNORANT. The ignorant think all things wrong which they cannot
understand.

842. ILL BIRD. It is an ill bird that defiles its own nest.

843. ILL DOG. 'Tis an ill dog that deserves not a bone.

844. ILL FORTUNE. He who hath no ill fortune, is dazed with good.

845. ILL GOT. Ill got, ill spent.

846. ILL GOTTEN. Ill gotten gains seldom prosper.

847. ILL LUCK. When ill luck falls asleep, let nobody wake her.

848. ILL NEWS. Ill news comes apace.

849. ILL WEEDS. Ill weeds grow apace.

850. ILL WORD. One ill word asketh another.

851. IMPOSSIBLE. Nothing is impossible to a willing mind.

852. IMPUDENCE. Impudence is not courage.

853. INCH. Give him an inch, and he'll take an ell.

854. INCHES. God never measures men by inches.

855. INDUSTRY. Industry is fortune's right hand and frugality her left.

856. INFIRMITIES. Jest not at another's infirmities.

857. INGRATITUDE. Ingratitude is the daughter of pride.

858. INJURY. Pocket an injury.

859. INN. He goes not out of his way that goes to a good inn.

860. INSTINCT. Woman's instinct is often truer than man's reasoning.

861. INTENTIONS. Hell is paved with good intentions.

862. IRONS. He that hath many irons in the fire, some of them will cool.

863. ITCH. Itch and ease can no man please.


J

864. JACK. Jack-in-office is a great man.

865. JACK. Every Jack has his Jill.

866. JANIVEER.

     If Janiveer calends be summerly gay
     'Twill be winterly weather till calends of May.

867. JANIVEER. Who in Janiveer sows oats, gets gold and groats.

868. JEST. Better lose a jest than a friend.

869. JEST. Many a true word is spoken in jest.

870. JESTING. Jesting lies bring serious sorrows.

871. JESTS. Jests, like sweetmeats, are often sour sauce.

872. JOURNEY. 'Tis a great journey to the world's end.

873. JOY. No joy without annoy.

874. JOY. There's no joy without alloy.

875. JOY. Joy surfeited turns to sorrow.

876. JUDGE. Judge not of men or things at first sight.

877. JUDGE. Judge not a ship as she lies on the stocks.

878. JUDGMENT. He hath a good judgment who is apt to distrust his own.

879. JUNE.

     Calm weather in June
     Sets corn in tune.

880. JULY.

     If the first of July, it be rainy weather,
     'Twill rain more or less for four weeks together.

881. JUST. Just is honest, and honest is just.


K

882. KEEP. Keep a thing seven years, and you will find a use for it.

883. KEEP. Keep some till more come.

884. KERNEL. He that will eat the kernel, must crack the nut.

885. KEY. The wife is the key of the house.

886. KEYS. All the keys hang not at one man's girdle.

887. KIN.

     Still stand by kin
     Through thick and thin.

888. KINDLED. Wood half burnt is easily kindled.

889. KINDNESS. Kindness will always conquer.

890. KINDNESSES. Kindnesses, like grain, increase by sowing.

891. KINSFOLK. Many kinsfolk, few friends.

892. KISS. As easy kiss my hand.

893. KISS. Many kiss the child for the nurse's sake.

894. KISSING. Kissing goes by favour.

895. KITCHEN. A fat kitchen, a lean will.

896. KITCHEN. The taste of the kitchen is better than the smell.

897. KITCHEN. Silks and satins put out the fire in the kitchen.

898. KNAVERY. Knavery may serve for a turn, but honesty is best in the
long run.

899. KNAVES. Knaves and fools divide the world.

900. KNAVES. When knaves fall out, true men come by their goods.

901. KNOT. He tied a knot with his tongue he couldn't undo with his
teeth.

902. KNOTS. Fools tie knots and wise men loose them.

903. KNOTTY TIMBER. To split knotty timber use smooth wedges.

904. KNOWLEDGE. Knowledge is power.

905. KNOWLEDGE. Knowledge in youth is wisdom in age.

906. KNOWLEDGE. The knowledge of the disease is half the cure.

907. KNOWLEDGE. Knowledge, like physic, is more plague than profit, if
it arrives too late.

908. KNOWLEDGE. An ounce of knowledge may be worth a pound of comfort.


L

909. LABOURS. He that labours and thrives, spins gold.

910. LABOUR. Labour warms, sloth harms.

911. LADLE. The ladle cools the pot.

912. LADDER. Step after step the ladder is ascended.

913. LAMB'S TAIL. A woman's tongue wags like a lamb's tail.

914. LAME. The lame goeth as far as the staggerer.

915. LAMMAS. After Lammas corn ripens as much by night as by day.

916. LAND. Land was never lost for want of an heir.

917. LAND.

     Many a one for land,
     Takes a fool by the hand.

918. LANTERN. On a dark night an owl would be glad of a lantern.

919. LAST STRAW. It is the last straw that breaks the camel's back.

920. LATE. Better late than never.

921. LAUGH. Let them laugh that win.

922. LAUGH. That's where the laugh comes in.

923. LAUGH. They laugh the loudest who have least to lose.

924. LAW. In a thousand pounds of law there's not an ounce of love.

925. LAW. The law is not the same at morning and night.

926. LAW. He that loves law will get his fill.

927. LAW MAKERS. Law makers should not be law breakers.

928. LAWS. Laws catch flies, but let hornets go free.

929. LAWS.

     Laws, like spiders' webs, are wrought,
     Large flies break through, the small are caught.

930. LAWS. Laws were made for rogues.

931. LAWYER. A good lawyer, an evil neighbour.

932. LAWYERS. Fair and softly as lawyers go to heaven.

933. LAZY FOLK. Lazy folk take the most pains.

934. LEAD. A man may lead a horse to the water, but he cannot make him
drink unless he will.

935. LEAD. 'Tis folly to dig for lead with a silver shovel.

936. LEAK. A small leak will sink a great ship.

937. LEARN. Never too old to learn.

938. LEARNING. Learning makes a man fit company for himself.

939. LEAST. Least said is soonest mended.

940. LEAST BOY. The least boy always carries the greatest fiddle.

941. LEATHER. Nothing like leather.

942. LEECH. The empty leech sucks sore.

943. LEND. He that doth not lend doth lose his friend.

944. LEND. He would not lend his knife to the devil to stab himself.

945. LIAR. A liar should have a good memory.

946. LIARS. Liars have short wings.

947. LIBEL. The greater truth, the greater libel.

948. LIBERAL. The liberal man deviseth liberal things.

949. LIBERTY. Too much liberty spoils all.

950. LIE. One lie makes many.

951. LIES. He lies as fast as a dog can trot.

952. LIFE. Life is full of hazards, which experience neither bought nor
taught will always enable us to foresee.

953. LIFE. Life is half spent before we know what it is.

954. LIFE. Life is sweet.

955. LIFE. Life lies not in living, but in liking.

956. LIFE. While there's life there's hope.

957. LIGHT. He stands in his own light.

958. LIGHT. Every light has its shadow.

959. LIGHT. Every light is not the sun.

960. LIGHT GAINS. Light gains make a heavy purse.

961. LIKE. As like as two peas.

962. LIKE. Every one as they like best, as the good man said when he
kissed his cow.

963. LIKE. Like father like son.

964. LIKE. Like will to like.

965. LION. The lion's not half so fierce as he's painted.

966. LIPS. Lips however rosy must be fed.

967. LISTENERS. Listeners never hear good of themselves.

968. LITTLE. Little and often fills the purse.

969. LITTLE. Little mother, little daughter.

970. LITTLE BIRDS. Little birds may peck a dead lion.

971. LITTLE BOATS. Little boats must keep the shore.

972. LITTLE BODIES. Little bodies have large souls.

973. LITTLE GOOD. A little good is soon spent.

974. LITTLE GOODS. Little goods, little care.

975. LITTLE HOLE. One may see day at a little hole.

976. LITTLE HOUSE.

     A little house well fill'd,
     A little land well till'd,
     And a little wife well will'd.

977. LITTLE MINDS. Little minds, like weak liquors, are soon soured.

978. LITTLE THINGS. Little things please little minds.

979. LIVE. Everything would live.

980. LIVE. It's not how long, but how well, we live.

981. LIVE. Live and learn.

982. LIVE. Live and let live.

983. LIVER (LONGEST). The longest liver dies at last.

984. LIVES. He that lives not well one year sorrows for it seven.

985. LIVETH. He liveth long that liveth well.

986. LIVING DOG. A living dog is better than a dead lion.

987. LOAD. All lay load on the willing horse.

988. LOCK. You needn't lock the stable door when the steed is stolen.

989. LOOK. Look before you leap.

990. LOOK. They look one way and row another.

991. LOOKED FOR. Long looked for comes at last.

992. LONG LANE. 'Tis a long lane that has no turning.

993. LONGS. He that longs most lacks most.

994. LONGEST DAY. The longest day must have an end.

995. LOQUACITY. The loquacity of fools is a warning to the wise.

996. LORDS. New lords new laws.

997. LOSERS. Losers are always in the wrong.

998. LOSS.

     He that goeth out with often loss,
     At last comes home by Weeping Cross.

999. LOST. 'Tis not lost that comes at last.

1000. LOVE. Love is no lack.

1001. LOVE. Love is blind.

1002. LOVE. Love is the touchstone of virtue.

1003. LOVE. Love lives in cottages as well as in courts.

1004. LOVE. Love me little, love me long.

1005. LOVE. Love me, love my dog.

1006. LOVE. They love too much who die for love.

1007. LOVE. Whom we love best to them we can say least.

1008. LOVE AND A COUGH. Love and a cough cannot be hid.

1009. LOVE (HOT). Hot love is soon cold.

1010. LOVERS. Lovers live on love, as larks on leeks.

1011. LOWLY SIT. Lowly sit and be richly warm.

1012. LUCK. Give a man luck, and throw him into the sea.

1013. LUCK. The devil's children have the devil's luck.

1014. LUCK (ILL). What is worse than ill-luck?

1015. LUCKY. It is better to be born lucky than rich.

1016. LUCKY. It's better to be lucky than wise.

1017. LUCKY. Happy go lucky.

1018. LURCH. Never leave a friend in the lurch.


M

1019. MAIDENS. Maidens must be seen and not heard.

1020. MALICE. Malice is mindful.

1021. MALT. Slow fire makes sweet malt.

1022. MAN. A man at five may be a fool at fifteen.

1023. MAN. Man proposes, God disposes.

1024. MAN. Man doth what he can, and God what He will.

1025. MANNERS. Manners often make fortunes.

1026. MANY HANDS. Many hands make light work.

1027. MARCH.

     March wind and May sun,
     Make clothes white and maids dun.

1028. MARCH. March many weathers.

1029. MARCH DUST. A bushel of March dust is worth a king's ransom.

1030. MARKET. A man must sell his ware at the rate of the market.

1031. MARKET. Forsake not the market for the toll.

1032. MARKET. If fools went not to market, bad ware would not be sold.

1033. MARKET. Three women and a goose make a market.

1034. MARRIAGE (ILL). An ill marriage is a spring of ill fortune.

1035. MARRIAGE. Marriage halves our griefs, and doubles our joys.

1036. MARRIAGES. Marriages are made in heaven.

1037. MARRIES. He who marries for wealth sells his liberty.

1038. MARRY. Marry in haste, repent at leisure.

1039. MARRY.

     Bachelors, before you marry,
     Have a house wherein to tarry.

1040. MARRY.

     If you regard old saws, mind, thus they say,
     'Tis bad to marry in the month of May.

1041. MASTER. Like master like man.

1042. MASTER. He that will too soon be his own master, will have a fool
for his scholar.

1043. MASTER. No man is his craft's master the first day.

1044. MASTER. Marry above your match and you get a master.

1045. MASTER. One eye of the master sees more than four of the
servants'.

1046. MASTER-CRAFT. Of all the crafts honesty is the master-craft.

1047. MASTERS. No man can serve two masters.

1048. MASTER'S EYE. The master's eye makes the horse fat.

1049. MASTER'S EYE. The master's eye does more work than his hands.

1050. MATRIMONY. Matrimony's a matter of money.

1051. MAY BE. Every "may be" hath a "may not be."

1052. MAY. A windy March and a rainy April make a beautiful May.

1053. MAY (COLD).

     A cold May,
     Plenty of corn and hay.

1054. MEADOW. A thin meadow is soon mowed.

1055. MEASURE. Good measure is a merry mean.

1056. MEASURE. With what measure ye mete it shall be measured to you
again.

1057. MEASURE. Measure twice before you cut once.

1058. MEASURES. He measures your corn by his bushel.

1059. MEAT. Much meat, much maladies.

1060. MEAT. Meat is much, but manners is more.

1061. MEDIUM. There's a medium between painting the face and not washing
it.

1062. MEDLARS. Medlars are never good till they be rotten.

1063. MEDLARS. Time and straw make medlars ripe.

1064. MEND. It is never too late to mend.

1065. MEND. If every one would mend one, all would be mended.

1066. MEND. In the end things will mend.

1067. MERCY. Cry you mercy, who killed my cat?

1068. MERRY. He that is of a merry heart hath a continual feast.

1069. MERRY. It's good to be merry and wise.

1070. MERRY. It is good to be merry at meat.

1071. MERRY. Merry meet, merry part, merry meet again.

1072. MERRY. As long lives a merry heart as a sad.

1073. MERRY MONTH. The merry month of May.

1074. METTLE. Mettle is dangerous in a blind horse.

1075. MILK. Milk which will not be made into butter must be made into
cheese.

1076. MILK. Who would keep a cow when he may have a bottle of milk for a
penny!

1077. MILL. No mill, no meal.

1078. MILLSTONE. I can see as far into a millstone as the picker.

1079. MILLSTONE. The lower millstone grinds as well as the upper.

1080. MIND. Out of sight, out of mind.

1081. MIND.

     In the forehead and the eye,
     The picture of the mind doth lie.

1082. MIND. A woman's mind and winter wind often change.

1083. MIND. A wise man changes his mind; a fool never.

1084. MIRTH. A pennyworth of mirth is worth a pound of sorrow.

1085. MISCHIEF. A little mischief is too much.

1086. MISCHIEFS. Mischiefs come by the pound and go away by the ounce.

1087. MISFORTUNES. Misfortunes seldom come alone.

1088. MISS. A miss is as good as a mile.

1089. MISTS.

     So many mists in March you see,
     So many frosts in May will be.

1090. MISUNDERSTANDING. Misunderstanding brings lies to town.

1091. MOB. The mob has many heads, but no brains.

1092. MOCKING. Mocking is catching.

1093. MODESTY. Modesty is the handmaid of virtue.

1094. MONDAY.

     Monday for wealth,
     Tuesday for health,
     Wednesday the best day of all;
     Thursday for crosses,
     Friday for losses,
     Saturday no luck at all.

1095. MONEY. Money is more easily made than made use of.

1096. MONEY.

     They who have money are troubled about it,
     And they who have none are troubled without it.

1097. MONEY. Money makes money.

1098. MONEY. Money often makes the man.

1099. MONEY. The abundance of money ruins youth.

1100. MONEY. A fool and his money are soon parted.

1101. MONEY. A fool may make money, but a wise man should spend it.

1102. MONEY. 'Tis money makes the mare to go.

1103. MONEY. He that hath no money needeth no purse.

1104. MOON.

     In the old of the moon,
     A cloudy morning bodes a fair afternoon.

1105. MOON.

     A Saturday's moon
     Always comes too soon.

1106. MOON. The moon's not seen where the sun shines.

1107. MORE. The more the merrier; the fewer the better cheer.

1108. MORNING. Lose an hour in the morning, and you'll be all day
hunting for it.

1109. MORNING SUN. The morning sun never lasts a day.

1110. MOST. Do as most do, and fewest will speak ill of thee.

1111. MOST. Most take all.

1112. MOTHER'S BREATH. The mother's breath is always sweet.

1113. MOTHER'S HEART. A mother's heart never grows old.

1114. MOTHER-WIT. An ounce of mother-wit is worth a pound of clergy.

1115. MOUNTAIN. Never make a mountain of a mole-hill.

1116. MOUNTAIN. If the mountain will not go to Mahomet, let Mahomet go
to the mountain.

1117. MOUTH CIVILITY. Mouth civility costs little but is worth less.

1118. MOUTHS. He that sends mouths sends meat.

1119. MUCH. A fool demands much, but he's a greater that gives it.

1120. MUCH. Much is expected where much is given.

1121. MUCH. Much would have more, and lost all.

1122. MUDDLES. Muddles at home make husbands roam.

1123. MUFFLED CATS. Muffled cats are bad mousers.

1124. MURDER. Murder will out.

1125. MUSIC. Music helps not the toothache.

1126. MUSIC. Where music is no harm can be.

1127. MUSICIAN. When a musician hath forgot his note, he makes as though
a crumb stuck in his throat.

1128. MUSK. It's no use looking for musk in a dog's kennel.

1129. MUTE. They are as mute as fishes.


N

1130. NAME. A good name is better than riches.

1131. NAME. A good name keeps its lustre in the dark.

1132. NAME. Take away my good name, and take away my life.

1133. NATURE. 'Tis the nature of the beast.

1134. NECESSITY. Necessity knows no law.

1135. NECESSITY. Make a virtue of necessity.

1136. NECESSITY. Necessity is the mother of invention.

1137. NEED. Need makes the old wife trot.

1138. NEED. A friend in need is a friend indeed.

1139. NEEDLE. To look for a needle in a pottle of hay.

1140. NEEDY.

     He that's needy when he is married
     Shall be rich when he is buried.

1141. NEIGHBOUR. Love thy neighbour, but pull not down thy hedge.

1142. NEIGHBOUR-QUART. Neighbour-quart is good quart.

1143. NEIGHBOUR. You must ask your neighbour if you shall live in peace.

1144. NEIGHBOUR'S HOUSE. When thy neighbour's house is on fire, be
careful of thine own.

1145. NET. All is fish that comes to his net.

1146. NEW.

     Be not the first by whom the new is tried,
     Be not the last to cast the old aside.

1147. NEW BROOM. A new broom sweeps clean.

1148. NEWS. No news is good news.

1149. NIMBLE. A nimble ninepence is better than a slow shilling.

1150. NIP. Nip it in the bud.

1151. NOBLE. The more noble the more humble.

1152. NODS. The great Homer himself sometimes nods.

1153. NONSENSE.

     A little nonsense now and then
     Is relished by the wisest men.

1154. NOTICE. It is the part of a wise man to take no notice of many
things.

1155. NOTHING. By doing nothing we learn to do ill.

1156. NOTHING. Of nothing comes nothing.

1157. NOTHING. Doing nothing is the hardest work.

1158. NOTHING. Nothing came out of the sack but what was in it.

1159. NOTHING. It is more painful to do nothing than something.

1160. NOTHING. Doing nothing is doing ill.

1161. NOVEMBER.

     November take flail,
     Let ships no more sail.

1162. NOW. Now or never.

1163. NURSE. The nurse's tongue is privileged to talk.

1164. NUTSHELL. You may as well bid me lade the sea with a nutshell.


O

1165. OAK. An oak is not felled by one blow.

1166. OCCASION. An occasion lost cannot be redeemed.

1167. OCTOBER.

     Good October, a good blast,
     To blow the hog acorn and mast.

1168. OFFER. Never refuse a good offer.

1169. OFFENDER. The offender never pardons.

1170. OFTEN. Little and often fills the purse.

1171. OLD AGE. When old age is evil, youth can learn no good.

1172. OLD. Old young, old long.

1173. OLD CAT. An old cat laps as much as a young kitten.

1174. OLD COCK. As the old cock crows so crows the young.

1175. OLD DOG. An old dog barks not in vain.

1176. OLD DOG. An old dog will learn no tricks.

1177. OLDER. Older and wiser.

1178. OLD FOOLS. Old fools are the worst of fools.

1179. OLD FOXES. Old foxes need no tutors.

1180. OLD FRIENDS. Old friends to meet, old wine to drink, and old wood
to burn.

1181. OLD FRIENDS. Old friends and old wine are best.

1182. OLD MEN. Old men are twice children.

1183. OLD SACK. An old sack wanteth much patching.

1184. OLD SAWS. Old saws speak the truth.

1185. OLD SORE. It's ill healing an old sore.

1186. OMELETTES. You can't make omelettes without breaking eggs.

1187. ONCE. Once well done is twice done.

1188. ONE. Make much of one, good men are scarce.

1189. ONE HAND. One hand will not clasp.

1190. ONE HOLE. The mouse that hath but one hole is easily taken.

1191. ONE THING. Too much of one thing is good for nothing.

1192. OPPORTUNITY. Opportunity makes the thief.

1193. OPPORTUNITY. Opportunity lingers sometimes.

1194. OPPRESSION. Oppression causeth rebellion.

1195. ORDERLY. In an orderly house all is soon ready.

1196. ORTS. Evening orts are good morning fodder.

1197. OTHERWISE. Some are wise, and some are otherwise.

1198. OUGHT. Do what thou ought, let come what may.

1199. OUTBID. Be not too hasty to outbid another.

1200. OVER. Over boots, over shoes.

1201. OVERTAKES. None is so wise but the fool overtakes him sometimes.

1202. OYSTERS. Oysters are not good in the month that hath not an R in
it.

1203. OWN DOG. A man may cause his own dog to bite him.


P

1204. PAIN. Pain is forgotten where gain follows.

1205. PAIN. Great pain and little gain make a man soon weary.

1206. PAINS. No pains, no profit.

1207. PAINS. Pains are the wages of ill-pleasures.

1208. PAINTING. On painting and fighting look aloof off.

1209. PARDON. Pardon all men, but never thyself.

1210. PARENTS. Study to be worthy of your parents.

1211. PARTRIDGE.

     If the partridge had the woodcock's thigh,
     It would be the best bird that ever did fly.

1212. PASSION. A man in a passion rides a horse that runs away with him.

1213. PATCH. Patch and sit long, build and soon flit.

1214. PATIENCE. Patience is a flower that grows not in every one's
garden.

1215. PATIENCE. Patience is a plaister for all sores.

1216. PATIENT. As patient as Job.

1217. PAY. Pay him in his own coin.

1218. PAY. Pay as you go.

1219. PAYS LAST. He that pays last never pays twice.

1220. PAYMENT.

     They who don't intend to pay,
     Will promise payment any day.

1221. PEARLS. Cast not pearls before swine.

1222. PEAS. He who hath most peas may put most in the pot.

1223. PEDLAR. A small pack suits a small pedlar.

1224. PEDLAR. Let every pedlar carry his own pack.

1225. PEN. Pen and ink are a wit's plough.

1226. PENCE. Take care of the pence, and the pounds will take care of
themselves.

1227. PENNY. That penny is well spent that saves a groat.

1228. PENNY. A penny in my purse will bid me drink when all my friends I
have will not.

1229. PENNY. A penny in your pocket is a good companion.

1230. PENNY. In for a penny, in for a pound.

1231. PENNY. A penny saved is a penny got.

1232. PENNY WISE. Penny wise and pound foolish.

1233. PEPPER. Pepper is black, yet it hath a good smack.

1234. PERCH. The topmost branch is not the safest perch.

1235. PERIL. Peril proves who dearly loves.

1236. PERSEVERANCE. Perseverance kills the game.

1237. PERSUASION. The persuasion of the fortunate sways the doubtful.

1238. PETER. He robs Peter to pay Paul.

1239. PHYSICIAN. Physician heal thyself.

1240. PHYSICIANS.

     The best physicians are Doctor Diet,
     Doctor Cheeriman, and Doctor Quiet.

1241. PICTURES. Painted pictures are dead speakers.

1242. PIG'S TAIL. You can't make a horn of a pig's tail.

1243. PILLOW. Sleep on it; the pillow is the best counsellor.

1244. PILOT. Every man is a pilot in a calm sea.

1245. PIN. He that will not stoop for a pin, shall never be worth a
point.

1246. PIN.

     See a pin and let it lie,
     Want a pin before you die.

1247. PIN. A pin a day is a groat a year.

1248. PINCHES. No one knows where the shoe pinches so well as him who
wears it.

1249. PIPE. He can ill pipe that wants his upper lip.

1250. PITCHER. The pitcher does not go so often to the water, but it
comes home broken at last.

1251. PITY. Pity, promises, and blame, are always cheap and plentiful.

1252. PITY. Foolish pity spoils a city.

1253. PLACE. Sit in your place, and none can make you rise.

1254. PLACE. A place for everything, and everything in its place.

1255. PLAIN DEALING. Plain dealing's a jewel.

1256. PLAY.

     All play and no work,
     Gives Tom a ragged shirt.

1257. PLAY. All work and no play makes Jack a dull boy.

1258. PLAY. If you play with a fool at home, he'll play with you in the
market.

1259. PLEASE ALL.

     He that would please all, and himself too,
     Undertakes what he cannot do.

1260. PLEASING. Pleasing ware is half sold.

1261. PLEASURE. Make not a toil of your pleasure.

1262. PLENTY. Plenty as blackberries.

1263. PLOUGH. Don't stop the plough to catch a mouse.

1264. PLOUGH. A man must plough with such oxen as he hath.

1265. PLOUGH.

     He that by the plough would thrive,
     Himself must either hold or drive.

1266. POOR. Do not live poor to die rich.

1267. POOR. As poor as Job.

1268. POOR FOLK. Poor folk have few kindred.

1269. POOR FOLK. Poor folk are glad of pottage.

1270. POPE. He that would be Pope must think of nothing else.

1271. POSSESSION. Possession is nine points of the law, and they say
there are but ten.

1272. POT. A little pot is soon hot.

1273. POT. The pot calls the kettle black.

1274. POVERTY. Poverty parts friends.

1275. POVERTY. Poverty breeds strife.

1276. POVERTY. Poverty is the mother of health.

1277. POVERTY. When poverty comes in at the door, friendship leaps out
of the window.

1278. POVERTY. Poverty parteth good fellowship.

1279. POVERTY. Poverty makes a man acquainted with strange bed-fellows.

1280. PRACTICE. Practice makes perfect.

1281. PRAISE. True praise takes root and spreads.

1282. PRAISE. Neither praise nor dispraise thyself, thine actions serve
the turn.

1283. PRAISE. Never sound the trumpet of your own praise.

1284. PRAISE. Praise a fair day at night.

1285. PRAISE. Old praise dies, unless you feed it.

1286. PRATE. Prate is but prate; 'tis money buys land.

1287. PRAY. He that would learn to pray let him go to sea.

1288. PRETTINESS. Prettiness makes no pottage.

1289. PRETTINESS. Prettiness dies quickly.

1290. PREVENTION. Prevention is better than cure.

1291. PREY. Birds of prey do not sing.

1292. PRIDE. Pride feels no pain.

1293. PRIDE. Pride will have a fall.

1294. PRIDE. Pride goes before, and shame follows after.

1295. PROCRASTINATION. Procrastination is the thief of time.

1296. PROMISE. He is poor indeed that cannot promise nothing.

1297. PROMISE. Be slow to promise, but quick to perform.

1298. PROMISE. Apt to promise, apt to forget.

1299. PROMISES. Promises are too much like pie-crusts, made to be
broken.

1300. PROOF. The proof of the pudding is in the eating.

1301. PROSPERITY. Prosperity gains friends, adversity tries them.

1302. PROUD MIND. There's nothing agrees worse than a proud mind and a
beggar's purse.

1303. PROVERB. According to the old proverb.

1304. PROVERBS. Proverbs are the texts of common life.

1305. PRY. Pry not into other people's affairs.

1306. PRYETH. He that pryeth into every cloud, may be stricken with a
thunder-bolt.

1307. PUDDLE. Every path hath a puddle.

1308. PUFF. Puff not against the wind.

1309. PULL. Pull gently on a weak rope.

1310. PULL DOWN. It is easier to pull down than to build.

1311. PUNCTUALITY. Punctuality begets confidence.

1312. PUNISHMENT. Many without punishment, none without sin.

1313. PURSE. Be ruled by your purse.

1314. PURSE. Let your purse be your master.

1315. PURSE. You cannot make a purse of a sow's ear.

1316. PURSE. A full purse maketh the mouth to speak.

1317. PURSE. He that shows his purse longs to be rid of it.

1318. PURSE.

     Be it better or be it worse,
     Be ruled by him who bears the purse.

1319. PURSE. A heavy purse makes a light heart.

1320. PURSE. He who gets four pounds and spends five has no need of a
purse.

1321. PURSES (WRINKLED). Wrinkled purses make wrinkled faces.


Q

1322. QUARREL. Don't quarrel with the beggar for his bone.

1323. QUENCH. To cast oil in the fire is not the way to quench it.

1324. QUICK. Quick at meat, quick at work.

1325. QUIETNESS. Next to love, quietness.

1326. QUIET LIFE. Anything for a quiet life.

1327. QUOTE. The devil can quote Scripture to suit his purpose.


R

1328. RAGGED COLT. A ragged colt may make a good horse.

1329. RAIN.

     Rain from east,
     Two days at least.

1330. RAIN.

     Should it rain on Easter Day,
     There'll be plenty of grass and little hay.

1331. RAIN. Some rain, some rest.

1332. RAIN. After rain comes fair weather.

1333. RAIN. Small rain lays great dust.

1334. RAINS. It never rains but it pours.

1335. RAISE. Raise no more spirits than you can conjure down.

1336. READY MONEY. Ready money will away.

1337. REAL FRIEND. He is a real friend who assists one in a pinch.

1338. REASON. If we do not hear reason she will one day make herself be
heard.

1339. REASON. There's reason in roasting of eggs.

1340. RECEIVER. The receiver is as bad as the thief.

1341. RECEIVERS. If there were no receivers there would be no thieves.

1342. RECKLESS YOUTH. Reckless youth makes rueful age.

1343. RECKONS. He that reckons without his host must reckon again.

1344. RECKONING. Fools always come short of their reckoning.

1345. RECKONING. Short reckonings make long friends.

1346. RECONCILE. Reconcile yourself to present trials, the future may
bring worse.

1347. RECORDER. A good recorder sets all in order.

1348. REIGNS. Man reigns and woman rules.

1349. REINS. Men hold the reins, but the women tell them which way to
drive.

1350. RELIGION. Better wear a cloak for religion than religion for a
cloak.

1351. REMOVE. Remove an old tree and it will wither.

1352. REMOVED. A plant often removed cannot thrive.

1353. REPROOF. A smart reproof is better than smooth deceit.

1354. RESERVE. Reserve the master-blow.

1355. RE-TELLING. A story never loses by re-telling.

1356. REVENGE. To forget wrong is the greatest revenge.

1357. REVENGE. Revenge is sweet.

1358. RICH. God help the rich, the poor can beg.

1359. RICHES. Riches are like muck, which stink in a heap, but spread
abroad make the earth fruitful.

1360. RICHES. Riches are but the baggage of fortune.

1361. RIDE. Better ride on an ass that carries me than a horse that
throws me.

1362. RIGHT HAND. Let not thy right hand know what thy left hand doeth.

1363. RISETH. He that riseth betimes hath something in his head.

1364. RIVER. Follow the river and you'll get to the sea.

1365. ROAD. Rich country, bad road.

1366. ROOST. A bird can roost upon but one branch.

1367. ROLLING STONE. A rolling stone gathers no moss.

1368. ROME. When you are at Rome, do as Rome does.

1369. ROME. Rome was not built in a day.

1370. RUDDER. He that will not be ruled by the rudder must be ruled by
the rock.

1371. ROSE. The fairest rose at last is withered.

1372. ROTTEN APPLE. A rotten apple injures its companions.

1373. RUGGED STONE. A rugged stone grows smooth from hand to hand.

1374. RULE. There is no rule without an exception.

1375. RULES. Love rules his kingdom without a sword.

1376. RUNS. He that runs fastest gets the prize.

1377. RUNS FAST. He that runs fast will not run long.


S

1378. SACK. It's a bad sack will abide no clouting.

1379. SACK. Nothing comes out of the sack but what was in it.

1380. SADDLE. Set the saddle on the right horse.

1381. SADNESS. Sadness and gladness succeed each other.

1382. ST. DAVID'S DAY.

     Upon St. David's day,
     Put oats and barley in the clay.

1383. ST. STEPHEN.

     Blessed be St. Stephen;
     There's no fast upon his even.

1384. SAIL. Make not your sail too large for your ship.

1385. SALMON. Salmon and sermon have their season in Lent.

1386. SALT. Catch a bird by putting salt on its tail.

1387. SAND. You can't make ropes of sand.

1388. SAUCE. What's sauce for the goose is sauce for the gander.

1389. SAUCE. Sweet meat must have some sauce.

1390. SAVE.

     If youth knew what age will crave,
     It sure would strive to get and save.

1391. SAVE. Who will not save a penny, shall never have many.

1392. SAVING. Saving is getting.

1393. SAVING. It's useless saving at the spigot and spending at the
bung-hole.

1394. SAVING. Of saving cometh having.

1395. SAY. Learn to say before you sing.

1396. SAYING. Saying and doing are two things.

1397. SAYS. If a man says little he thinks the more.

1398. SAY WELL.

     "Say well," and "do well," end with one letter;
     To say well, it is well, but to do well is better.

1399. SCABBED SHEEP. One scabbed sheep infects the whole flock.

1400. SCALD. Scald not your lips in another man's pottage.

1401. SCALDED CAT. A scalded cat fears cold water.

1402. SCEPTRE. A sceptre is one thing, a ladle another.

1403. SCHOLAR. A mere scholar a mere ass.

1404. SCHOLARS. The greatest scholars are not always the wisest men.

1405. SCORNING. Scorning is catching.

1406. SCOTCH MIST. A Scotch mist will wet an Englishman through to the
skin.

1407. SEA. On the sea sail; on the land settle.

1408. SEASON. Everything is good in its season.

1409. SEASON. To everything there is a season; and a time to every
purpose under heaven.

1410. SECOND BLOW. 'Tis the second blow that makes a fray.

1411. SECRET. He that revealeth his secret maketh himself a slave.

1412. SEEING. Seeing is believing.

1413. SEEK. Seek till you find, and you'll lose no labour.

1414. SELDOM SEEN. Seldom seen, soon forgotten.

1415. SELF. Self do, self have.

1416. SELF LOVE. Self love's a mote in every man's eye.

1417. SELF PRAISE. Self praise is no recommendation.

1418. SEPTEMBER.

     September blow soft,
     Till the fruit's in the loft.

1419. SERVANTS. Good servants make good masters.

1420. SHADOW. Catch not at the shadow and lose the substance.

1421. SHARE. Share and share alike.

1422. SHAVING. It's ill shaving against the wool.

1423. SHEAR.

     Shear your sheep in May,
     And shear them all away.

1424. SHEEP. One sheep follows another.

1425. SHIPS. Ships fear fire more than water.

1426. SHOE. The finest shoe often hurts the foot.

1427. SHOE. To know where the shoe pinches.

1428. SHOOT. Every man will shoot at the enemy, but few will go to fetch
the shaft.

1429. SHOP. Keep thy shop, and thy shop will keep thee.

1430. SHORN SHEEP. God tempers the wind to the shorn sheep.

1431. SHORT CUTS. Short cuts are sometimes longest.

1432. SHORT RECKONINGS. Short reckonings are soon cleared.

1433. SHORT AND SWEET. Short and sweet like a donkey's gallop.

1434. SHREW. Every one can tame a shrew but he that hath her.

1435. SIGH. Never sigh but send.

1436. SIGHT. Out of sight out of mind.

1437. SILENCE. Silence seldom doth harm.

1438. SILENCE. Silence is consent.

1439. SILENCE. Silence is the best ornament of a woman.

1440. SILVER. White silver draws black lines.

1441. SILVER SPOON. He was born with a silver spoon in his mouth.

1442. SING. A bird that can sing and won't sing, must be made to sing.

1443. SING. None but fools and fiddlers sing at their meat.

1444. SINGS. Who sings drives away care.

1445. SIT STILL. As good sit still as rise up and fall.

1446. SLANDER. Few people are out of the reach of slander.

1447. SLANDER. Slander leaves a score behind it.

1448. SLAVERY.

     Account not that work slavery
     That brings in penny savoury.

1449. SLEEP. One hour's sleep before midnight is worth two hours after.

1450. SLEEPING. There is sleeping enough in the grave.

1451. SLEEPING DOG. Don't wake a sleeping dog.

1452. SLIP. Better that the feet slip than the tongue.

1453. SLOTH. Sloth turneth the edge of wit.

1454. SLOTH. Sloth is the mother of poverty.

1455. SLOW. Slow and sure.

1456. SLUGGARD'S GUISE.

     The sluggard's guise,
     Loth to go to bed and loth to rise.

1457. SLUTS. Sluts are good enough to make slovens' pottage.

1458. SMALL FISH. Better are small fish than an empty dish.

1459. SMALL THINGS. Small things affect light minds.

1460. SMALL THINGS. He that despiseth small things shall fall by little
and little.

1461. SMOKE. Where there is smoke there is fire.

1462. SNAKE. Put a snake in your bosom, and when it is warm it will
sting you.

1463. SNOW. A snow year, a rich year.

1464. SOFTLY. He that goes softly goes surely.

1465. SOFT WORDS. Soft words butter no parsnips.

1466. SOLDIERS. Soldiers in peace are like chimneys in summer.

1467. SON.

     My son's my son till he hath got him a wife,
     But my daughter's my daughter all the days of her life.

1468. SOON HOT. Soon hot, soon cold.

1469. SOONER SAID. 'Tis sooner said than done.

1470. SORROW. Sorrow and bad weather come unsent for.

1471. SORROW. Sorrow will pay no debt.

1472. SORROW. A fat sorrow is better than a lean one.

1473. SORROW. Sorrow is good for nothing but sin.

1474. SORROW. Sorrow will wear away in time.

1475. SORROW. When sorrow is asleep, wake it not.

1476. SORROW. Sorrow comes unsent for, and, like the unbidden guest,
brings his own stool.

1477. SORROWING. He goes a-sorrowing, who goes a-borrowing.

1478. SOUND. As sound as a nut.

1479. SOUR GRAPES. "Sour grapes," as the fox said when he could not
reach them.

1480. SOW. Every sow to her own trough.

1481. SOWS. Who sows in May gets little that way.

1482. SOWS. What a man sows, that shall he also reap.

1483. SPARE. 'Tis too late, to spare when the bottom is bare.

1484. SPARE. It is better to spare at the brim than the bottom.

1485. SPARE. Spare when young and spend when old.

1486. SPARE. Spare to speak and spare to spend.

1487. SPEAK. There is a time to speak as well as to be silent.

1488. SPEAK. Speak well of the dead.

1489. SPEAK. Many speak much that cannot speak well.

1490. SPEAK. Speak fair and think what you will.

1491. SPEAKS.

     He that speaks me fair and loves me not,
     I'll speak him fair and trust him not.

1492. SPECULATION. Speculation completes what extravagance began.

1493. SPEECH. Speech is the picture of the mind.

1494. SPEND. Spend not where you may save; spare not where you must
spend.

1495. SPEND. Carefully spend, and God will send.

1496. SPEND. Spend and be free, but make no waste.

1497. SPENDER. To a good spender God is the treasurer.

1498. SPENDERS. Great spenders are bad lenders.

1499. SPENDS.

     He who more than his worth doth spend,
     Makes a rope his life to end;
     He who spends more than he should,
     Shall not have to spend when he would.

1500. SPENDS. You may know by a penny how a shilling spends.

1501. SPENDTHRIFT. It is the thrift of a spendthrift which ruins him
most effectually.

1502. SPICE. Who hath spice enough may season his meat as he pleaseth.

1503. SPITE. Don't cut your nose off to spite your face.

1504. SPITS. Who spits against the wind spits in his own face.

1505. SPLIT. He would split a hair.

1506. SPOIL. Too many cooks spoil the broth.

1507. SPOIL. Spoil not the ship for a penn'orth of tar.

1508. SPOKEN OF. Better be ill spoken of by one before all, than by all
before one.

1509. SPORT. It's poor sport that is not worth the candle.

1510. SPORT. No sport, no pie.

1511. SPOTS. Rich men's spots are covered with money.

1512. SPRAT. Throw a sprat to catch a whale.

1513. SPUR. Do not spur a free horse.

1514. STABLE. Being born in a stable does not make a man a horse.

1515. STAKE. An ill stake standeth longest.

1516. STANDERS BY. Standers by see more than the gamesters.

1517. STANDING. The higher the standing the lower the fall.

1518. STANDING POOLS. Standing pools gather filth.

1519. STARS. Stars are not seen during sunshine.

1520. STARVE. He would starve in a cook-shop.

1521. STEAL. He that will steal an egg will steal an ox.

1522. STEAL. He that will steal a pin will steal a better thing.

1523. STEAL. One man may better steal a horse than another look over the
hedge.

1524. STEED. When the steed is stolen the stable door shall be shut.

1525. STEP BY STEP. Step by step the ladder is climbed.

1526. STICKS. Little sticks kindle the fire, but great ones put it out.

1527. STILE. He that will not go over the stile must be thrust through
the gate.

1528. STILL WATER. Trust not still water nor a silent man.

1529. STILL WATER. Keep me from still water; from that which is rough I
can keep myself.

1530. STILL WATERS. Still waters run deep.

1531. STINKING FISH. Never cry "Stinking fish."

1532. STITCH. A stitch in time saves nine.

1533. STOCK. Whoso lacketh a stock, his gain's not worth a chip.

1534. STOLEN KISSES. Stolen kisses are sweet.

1535. STOMACH. The full stomach loatheth the honeycomb, but to the
hungry every bitter thing is sweet.

1536. STOMACH. With stomach, wife, and conscience keep on good terms.

1537. STONE WALL.

     Hard upon hard makes a bad stone wall;
     But soft upon soft makes none at all.

1538. STOOLS. Between two stools he comes to the ground.

1539. STOOP. He must stoop that hath a low door.

1540. STORM. After a storm comes a calm.

1541. STORE. Store is no sore.

1542. STORY. One story is good until another's told.

1543. STRAIGHT TREES. Straight trees have crooked roots.

1544. STRATAGEM. By stratagem, not valour.

1545. STREAM. No striving against the stream.

1546. STRIFE. Weight and measure take away strife.

1547. STRIFE. Haste makes waste, and waste makes want, and want makes
strife between the good man and his wife.

1548. STRIKE. Strike while the iron is hot.

1549. STROKES. Little strokes fell great oaks.

1550. STUDY. Morning is the time for study.

1551. STUMBLES. He that runs in the night stumbles.

1552. STUMBLES. He that stumbles twice over the same stone, deserves to
break his shins.

1553. STUMBLES. 'Tis a good horse that never stumbles, and a good wife
that never grumbles.

1554. SUBJECTS' LOVE. The subjects' love is the king's lifeguard.

1555. SUCCESS. Nothing succeeds like success.

1556. SUCCESS.

     'Tis not in mortals to command success,
     But we'll do more, Sempronius, we'll deserve it.

1557. SUCKERS. The young suckers drain the old tree.

1558. SUFFERANCE. Of sufferance comes ease.

1559. SUFFICIENT. Sufficient for the day is the evil thereof.

1560. SUIT. That suit is best that best fits me.

1561. SUNSHINE. No sunshine but hath some shadow.

1562. SUPPERLESS. Better go to bed supperless than to rise in debt.

1563. SUPPERS. Light suppers make long lives.

1564. SURE. Sure bind, sure find.

1565. SURGEON. A good surgeon must have an eagle's eye, a lion's heart,
and a lady's hand.

1566. SWALLOW. One swallow does not make a summer.

1567. SWALLOW. One swallow makes not a spring, nor one woodcock a
winter.

1568. SWEAT. No sweat, no sweet.

1569. SWEEP. Sweep before your own door.

1570. SWEEP. They have need of a besom that sweep the house with a turf.

1571. SWEET. He deserves not the sweet that will not taste the sour.

1572. SWIM. He must needs swim that's held up by the chin.

1573. SWIM. Never trust yourself out of your depth till you can swim.

1574. SWORD. He that strikes with the sword shall be beaten with the
scabbard.

1575. SWORD. Who draws his sword against his prince must throw away the
scabbard.


T

1576. TABLE. A poor man's table is soon spread.

1577. TABLE. Who depends upon another man's table often dines late.

1578. TALE-BEARER. Remove the tale-bearer and contention ceaseth.

1579. TALE-BEARERS. Put no faith in tale-bearers.

1580. TALK. Talk of the devil and his imp appears.

1581. TALKERS. The greatest talkers are always the least doers.

1582. TALKING. Talking pays no toll.

1583. TASTE. To him that hath lost his taste, sweet is sour.

1584. TEACHETH. He teacheth ill who teacheth all.

1585. TEARS. Nothing dries up sooner than tears.

1586. TEETH. A man may dig his grave with his teeth.

1587. TEMPERANCE. Temperance is the best physic.

1588. TEMPTER. The tempter is the greater rogue.

1589. THANKS. He loseth his thanks who promiseth and delayeth.

1590. THATCHED. When I have thatched his house he would throw me down.

1591. THIEF. Give a thief rope enough and he'll hang himself.

1592. THIEF. The thief's sorry because he is caught, not because he is
the thief.

1593. THIEF. Set a thief to take a thief.

1594. THIEVES. All are not thieves that dogs bark at.

1595. THINK. One may think that dares not speak.

1596. THINK. Think twice before you speak once.

1597. THINK. Think much, speak little, and write less.

1598. THINK.

     Who thinks to live must live to think,
     Else mind and body lose their link.

1599. THINKS. The horse thinks one thing, and he that rides him another.

1600. THINKERS. Thinkers govern toilers.

1601. THISTLES. Gather thistles, expect prickles.

1602. THISTLES. He that sows nothing plants thistles.

1603. THORN. No rose without a thorn.

1604. THORN. The thorn comes forth with his point forwards.

1605. THORNS. Roses, mind you, have thorns.

1606. THORNS. He that handles thorns shall prick his fingers.

1607. THOUGHTS. Second thoughts are best.

1608. THOUGHTS. Thoughts are free.

1609. THREATENED. There are more threatened than struck.

1610. THREEPENCE. If you make not much of threepence you'll ne'er be
worth a groat.

1611. THRIFTY. Thrifty men are fond of thrifty sayings.

1612. THRIVE.

     He that will thrive must rise at five.
     He that hath thriven may lie till seven.

1613. THUNDER. Thunder in December foretells fine weather.

1614. THUNDERS. When it thunders the thief becomes honest.

1615. THYSELF. For what thou canst do thyself rely not on another.

1616. TIDE. There is a tide in the affairs of man which, taken at the
flood, leads on to fortune.

1617. TIDE. Every tide has its ebb.

1618. TIDE. The tide will fetch away what the ebb brings.

1619. TIME. Take time by the forelock.

1620. TIME. A mouse, in time, may bite in two a cable.

1621. TIME. Take time when time is, for time will away.

1622. TIME. Time and tide tarry for no man.

1623. TIME. Time assuages the greatest grief.

1624. TIME. Time cures sorrow.

1625. TIME. Time is the rider that breaks youth.

1626. TIME. Time tries all.

1627. TIMELY. Timely blossom timely ripe.

1628. TITLE. Simon Noland, clown, is a better style and title than
Humphrey Hadland, gent.

1629. TO-DAY. To-day me, to-morrow thee.

1630. TOM. He's Tom Tell-troth.

1631. TO-MORROW. To-morrow comes never.

1632. TONGUE. A man may hold his tongue in an ill time.

1633. TONGUE. Temper the tongue.

1634. TONGUE. Confine your tongue, lest it confine you.

1635. TONGUE. Keep your tongue within your teeth.

1636. TONGUE.

     The tongue breaketh bone,
     Though itself have none.

1637. TONGUE. The tongue's not steel, yet it cuts.

1638. TONGUE. The tongue talks at the head's cost.

1639. TONGUE. One tongue is enough for a woman.

1640. TONGUE. Who has not a good tongue, ought to have good hands.

1641. TOO LATE. Better three hours too soon than a minute too late.

1642. TOOLS. A bad workman quarrels with his tools.

1643. TOOLS. What is a workman without his tools?

1644. TOO FAR. Too far east is west.

1645. TOO MUCH. He that grasps at too much, holds fast nothing.

1646. TOP SAWYERS. We can't all be top sawyers.

1647. TRADE. He that hath a trade hath an estate.

1648. TRADE. Every man to his trade.

1649. TRADE. Trade knows neither friends nor kindred.

1650. TRADE. Trade is the mother of money.

1651. TRADES. Jack of all trades, and master of none.

1652. TRADESMAN. A tradesman who gets not loseth.

1653. TRAVELS. He that travels far knows much.

1654. TREE. A tree is known by its fruit, and not by its leaves.

1655. TREE. Remove an old tree and it will wither to death.

1656. TREES. Set trees poor, and they will grow rich; set them rich, and
they will grow poor.

1657. TREES. You cannot see wood for trees.

1658. TRIFLE. Fall not out with a friend for a trifle.

1659. TROUBLE. He who seeketh trouble never misseth it.

1660. TROUBLED WATERS. Never fish in troubled waters.

1661. TROUBLES. Never make troubles of trifles.

1662. TROUBLES. Hidden troubles disquiet most.

1663. TRUE WORD. There's many a true word spoken in jest.

1664. TRUE. That is true which all men say.

1665. TRUST.

     If you trust before you try,
     You may repent it ere you die.

1666. TRUST. Trust in God, and keep your powder dry.

1667. TRUST NOT. Trust not a broken staff.

1668. TRUST NOT. Trust not a horse's heel, nor a dog's tooth.

1669. TRUTH. Truth lies in a well.

1670. TRUTH. Truth is stranger than fiction.

1671. TRUTH. Fair fall truth and daylight.

1672. TRUTH. Speak the truth and shame the devil.

1673. TRUTH. Truth hath a good face, but bad clothes.

1674. TRUTH. Truth may be blamed, but it can't be shamed.

1675. TRUTH.

     Whatever you do, whatever you say,
     Tell your doctor and lawyer the truth alway.

1676. TRY. Try your friend before you trust him.

1677. TUB. Every tub must stand on its own bottom.

1678. TURN. One good turn deserves another.

1679. TURNED. Swine, women, and bees are not to be turned.

1680. TWELFTH DAY. At twelfth-day the days are lengthened a cock's
stride.

1681. TWENTY. As good twenty as nineteen.

1682. TWICE. If things were to be done twice, all would be wise.

1683. TWO FACES. Never carry two faces under one hat.

1684. TWO HEADS. Two heads are better than one.

1685. TWO PLACES. One cannot be in two places at once.

1686. TWO SUNDAYS. When two Sundays come in one week--that is, never.


U

1687. UNHAPPY. An unhappy lad may make a good man.

1688. UNITS. The greatest number is made up of units.

1689. UNKNOWN. Unknown, unmissed.

1690. UNMINDED. Unminded, unmoaned.

1691. UNTAUGHT. Better untaught than ill-taught.

1692. USE. Use is second nature.

1693. USE. Use the means, and God will give the blessing.

1694. UTILITY. Utility is preferable to grandeur.


V

1695. VALENTINE'S DAY.

     On Valentine's day will a good goose lay,
     If she be a good goose, her dame well to pay,
     She will lay two eggs before Valentine's day.

1696. VALLEY. He who stays in the valley will never get over the hill.

1697. VALOUR. Valour can do little without discretion.

1698. VALOUR. Valour that parleys is near yielding.

1699. VENTURE. Nothing venture nothing win.

1700. VENTURE. Venture a small fish to catch a great one.

1701. VENTURE. Venture not all in one ship.

1702. VERY LAST. Fools think themselves wise to the very last.

1703. VICAR OF BRAY. The vicar of Bray will be vicar of Bray still.

1704. VICE. Vice is nourished by being concealed.

1705. VINE. Make the vine poor, and it will make you rich.

1706. VINEGAR. The sweetest wine makes the sharpest vinegar.

1707. VIRTUES. Search others for their virtues, thyself for their
faults.

1708. VOWS. Vows made in storms are forgotten in calms.


W

1709. WAGER. A wager is a fool's argument.

1710. WAGES. He who serves well need not be afraid to ask his wages.

1711. WAITS. He that waits on another man's trencher, makes many a late
dinner.

1712. WANT. The worth of a thing is best known by the want of it.

1713. WANT OF. For want of a nail the shoe is lost; for want of a shoe
the horse is lost; for want of a horse the rider is lost.

1714. WAR. War, hunting, and law, are as full of trouble as pleasure.

1715. WAR. War is death's feast.

1716. WAR. Who preacheth war is the devil's chaplain.

1717. WAR (GOOD). He that makes a good war makes a good peace.

1718. WARES (GOOD). Good wares make quick markets.

1719. WARM. He that is warm thinks all are so.

1720. WARM. He is wise enough that can keep himself warm in winter.

1721. WARM.

     The head and feet kept warm,
     The rest will take no harm.

1722. WASHING. There's no washing the blackamore white.

1723. WASTE. Waste not, want not.

1724. WASTE. Wilful waste makes woeful want.

1725. WATCH. Good watch prevents misfortune.

1726. WATCH. You may be a wise man though you cannot make a watch.

1727. WATCHED POT. A watched pot never boils.

1728. WATER. Water bewitched.

1729. WATER. We never know the worth of water till the well is dry.

1730. WAX. He that hath a head of wax must not walk in the sun.

1731. WAY. Where there's a will there's a way.

1732. WAYS (MORE). There are more ways to kill a dog than hanging.

1733. WAYS. To him that wills ways are not wanting.

1734. WEAKEST. Let the weakest go to the wall.

1735. WEAKEST. Where it is weakest there the thread breaketh.

1736. WEALTH. Their folly pleads the privilege of wealth.

1737. WEARER. The wearer best knows where the shoe pinches.

1738. WEARING. Everything is the worse for wearing.

1739. WEARS. Constant dropping wears the stone.

1740. WEATHER. 'Tis pity fair weather should do any harm.

1741. WEATHER (CHANGE). Any flat can talk of change of weather.

1742. WEDDING. Wedding and ill-wintering tame both man and beast.

1743. WEDLOCK. Wedlock is a padlock.

1744. WEDS. Who weds ere he be wise shall die ere he thrive.

1745. WEEP. As great a pity to see a woman weep, as to see a goose go
barefoot.

1746. WELCOME. As welcome as the flowers in May.

1747. WELCOME. "Welcome death," quoth the rat, when the trap fell down.

1748. WELCOME. Welcome is the best dish on the table.

1749. WELL. Let well alone.

1750. WELL. When the well is dug it is easy enough to pump.

1751. WELL-DOING. Be not weary of well-doing.

1752. WELL-ORDERED. All things are soon prepared in a well-ordered
house.

1753. WELLS. Well-drawn wells give the sweetest water.

1754. WEPT. I wept when I was born, and every day shows why.

1755. WHET. A whet is no let [hindrance].

1756. WHISTLE. You may pay too dear for your whistle.

1757. WHY. There's ne'er a why, but there's a wherefore.

1758. WIDE. Wide will wear but narrow will tear.

1759. WIFE. Choose your wife on Saturday, and not on a Sunday.

1760. WIFE. He that goes far from home for a wife, either intends to
cheat or will be cheated.

1761. WIFE. A man's best fortune or his worst is his wife.

1762. WIFE. There is one good wife in the country, and every man thinks
he hath her.

1763. WIFE (GOOD). A good wife makes a good husband.

1764. WIFE (GOOD).

     A good wife and health
     Are a man's best wealth.

1765. WIFE (GOOD).

     Saith Solomon the wise
     A good wife's a prize.

1766. WIFE (NEWS). He that tells his wife news is but newly married.

1767. WILD OATS. Happy is he who hath sown his wild oats betimes.

1768. WILES. Wise men are not caught by wiles.

1769. WILFUL. If wilful will to water, wilful must be drowned.

1770. WILFUL MAN. A wilful man never wants woe.

1771. WILL. Take the will for the deed.

1772. WILL. They that cannot do as they will, must do as they can.

1773. WILL. Will without reason is blind.

1774. WILL NOT. If one will not, another will.

1775. WILL (READY). Where the will is ready, the feet are light.

1776. WILL (WAY). Where there's a will there's a way.

1777. WILLING HORSE. All lay load on the willing horse.

1778. WILLING MIND. Nothing is impossible to a willing mind.

1779. WILLOWS. Willows are weak, yet they bend other wood.

1780. WIN. Win first, lose last.

1781. WIND (NORTH).

     When the wind's in the north
     You need not go forth [_to fish_].

1782. WIND (EAST).

     When the wind's in the east
     The fish will bite least.

1783. WIND (SOUTH).

     When the wind's in the south
     The bait goes in their mouth.

1784. WIND (WEST).

     When the wind's in the west
     The fish will bite best.

1785. WIND.

     Where the wind is on Candlemas Day
     There it will stick to the end of May.

1786. WIND (EAST).

     When the wind is in the east,
     'Tis neither good for man nor beast.

1787. WIND (ILL). It's an ill wind that blows nobody good.

1788. WIND (SOUTH).

     When the wind's in the south
     It's in the rain's mouth.

1789. WIND (STILL).

     No weather is ill
     If the wind be still.

1790. WINDFALLS. None ever yet got fat on windfalls.

1791. WINDMILL. You cannot drive a windmill with a pair of bellows.

1792. WINE. More have been drowned in wine than water.

1793. WINE. When wine sinks, words swim.

1794. WINE. Wine is the master's, but the goodness is the drawer's.

1795. WINE (GOOD). Good wine needs no bush.

1796. WINE (IN). When wine is in, wit is out.

1797. WINE (TURNCOAT). Wine is a turncoat, first a friend, then an
enemy.

1798. WINK. Wink at small faults.

1799. WINK. A wink's as good as a nod to a blind horse.

1800. WINTER (GOOD). A good winter brings a good summer.

1801. WINTER. Winter finds out what summer lays up.

1802. WISDOM. By wisdom peace, by peace plenty.

1803. WISDOM. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom.

1804. WISDOM. Wisdom rides upon the ruins of folly.

1805. WISE. Better wise than wealthy.

1806. WISE MEN. Wise men care not for what they cannot have.

1807. WISHES. If wishes were horses, beggars would ride.

1808. WISHES. If wishes were thrushes, beggars would eat birds.

1809. WISHES. If wishes would bide, beggars would ride.

1810. WISHES. If wishes were butter-cakes, beggars would bite.

1811. WIT. Wit is the lightning of the mind.

1812. WIT. Wit bought is twice taught.

1813. WIT. You may truss up all his wit in an egg-shell.

1814. WIT. Wit ill applied is a dangerous weapon.

1815. WIT. Wit is folly, unless a wise man hath the keeping of it.

1816. WIT. Wit may be bought too dear.

1817. WITS. He that lives upon his wits, breaks for want of stock.

1818. WIVE. A man cannot both wive and thrive in a year.

1819. WOE. Woe follows wickedness.

1820. WOLF. He had enough to keep the wolf from the door.

1821. WOLVES. Wolves lose their teeth, but not their memory.

1822. WOMAN'S STRENGTH. A woman's strength is in her tongue.

1823. WOMAN'S WORK. A woman's work is never at an end.

1824. WOMEN. Discreet women have neither eyes nor ears.

1825. WOMEN (WILLS). Women must have their wills while they live,
because they make none when they die.

1826. WONDER. A wonder lasts but nine days.

1827. WOO. To woo is a pleasure in young men, a fault in old.

1828. WOODCOCK. One woodcock does not make a winter.

1829. WOOING.

     Happy is the wooing,
     That is not long a-doing.

1830. WOOL. Many go for wool and come back shorn.

1831. WOOL SELLERS. Wool sellers know wool buyers.

1832. WORD. An honest man's word is as good as his bond.

1833. WORDS.

     A man of words and not of deeds,
     Is like a garden full of weeds.

1834. WORDS.

     Words are but sands,
     'Tis money buys lands.

1835. WORDS.

     Sometimes words
     Wound more than swords.

1836. WORDS. Words are like weights, gravity gives them effect.

1837. WORDS. Words are for women, actions for men.

1838. WORDS AND BLOWS.

     Words are but wind,
     But blows unkind.

1839. WORD (ENOUGH). A word is enough to the wise.

1840. WORDS (EVENING). Words spoken in an evening the wind carrieth
away.

1841. WORDS (FAIR). Fair words butter no parsnips.

1842. WORDS (FAIR). Fair words will not keep a cat from starving.

1843. WORDS (FEW). Few words are best.

1844. WORDS (GOOD). Good words cool more than cold water.

1845. WORDS (GOOD). Good words fill not a sack.

1846. WORDS (MANY). Many words will not fill a bushel.

1847. WORDS (SOFT). Soft words hurt not the mouth.

1848. WORK. They that will not work in heat, must hunger in frost.

1849. WORKMEN (BAD). Bad workmen always complain of their tools.

1850. WORLD. One half of the world knows not how the other half lives.

1851. WORLD. The world is his who knows how to wait for it.

1852. WORLD. The world was never so dull but if one won't another will.

1853. WORLD. This world is nothing except it tend to the next.

1854. WORLD'S PULSE. There needs a long time to know the world's pulse.

1855. WORM. Tread on a worm and it will turn.

1856. WORST. When things get to the worst, they'll mend.

1857. WORST SPOKE. The worst spoke in the cart-wheel breaks first.

1858. WOULD.

     "He that wolde not when he might,
     He shall not when he wold-a."

1859. WOUNDS. Wounds may heal, but not those made by ill words.

1860. WRANGLERS. Wranglers never want words.

1861. WRATH. A soft answer turneth away wrath.

1862. WRESTLE. He that is thrown would ever wrestle.

1863. WRETCH. He who maketh others wretched is himself a wretch, whether
prince or peasant.

1864. WRONGS. Two wrongs will not make a right.

1865. WRONG SOW. To take the wrong sow by the ear.


Y

1866. YEAR. Say no ill of the year till it is passed.

1867. YEARS. Years know more than books.

1868. YES AND NO.

     Between a woman's yes and no,
     There is not room for a pin to go.

1869. YORKSHIRE. Yorkshire fashion--every man pay his share.

1870. YOUNG. Old young, and old long.

1871. YOURSELF. Help yourself and your friends will like you.

1872. YOURSELF. If you want a thing done, do it yourself.

1873. YOUTH. A growing youth hath a wolf in his stomach.

1874. YOUTH.

     If youth knew what age would crave.
     It would both get and save.

1875. YOUTH. Youth and white paper take any impression.

1876. YOUTH. Youth will have its swing.

1877. YULE. Yule is good on Yule even.


Z

1878. ZEAL. Zeal without knowledge is fire without light.

1879. ZEAL. Zeal without knowledge is frenzy.

1880. ZEAL. Zeal without knowledge is the sister of folly.




INDEX

OF PRINCIPAL WORDS.

_The Subject Words of the Dictionary are not repeated here._


     _Word_                              _No._


     A

     Ability--gentility                   668

     Abroad--beef                         460

     Abundance--money                    1099

     Accuser                              735

     Acorn--October                      1167

     Acquittance                          614

     Acquaintances                        571

     Actions                             1282

     Actions for men                     1837

     Advantage                            628

     Adversity--friends                   645

     Adversity tries                     1301

     Affairs--others                     1305

     Affairs of men                      1616

     Afraid--cowardice                    342

     Afternoon--fair                     1104

     Age--rueful                         1342

     Age--save                           1390

     Age--youth                          1874

     Agrees worse                        1302

     Air--castles                         206

     Alloy--joy                           874

     Almanacks                            330

     Alone--better                         54

     Amends--angry                         32

     Angry man                            827

     Another's table                     1577

     Answer--fool                         603

     Appetite                             475

     Apple--rotten                       1372

     April--rainy                        1052

     Architect                            625

     Argument--fact                       528

     Argument--wager                     1709

     Arm--bone in                         143

     Armour--hog                          790

     Ash                                  454

     Asleep--sorrow                      1475

     Ass--head                            765

     Ass--mere                           1403

     Ass-ride                            1361

     Autumn                                48


     B

     Bachelors                           1039

     Back--the                            169

     Bacon--father's                      241

     Bad clothes--truth                  1673

     Bad company                           84

     Bad excuse                           516

     Bad sack                            1378

     Baggage--riches                     1360

     Bait--fishes' mouth                  589

     Bait--wind                          1783

     Bake--brew                           164

     Bankrupt--beggar                      95

     Bare--spare                         1483

     Barefoot                             392

     Bargain--bad                         113

     Bark at--thieves                    1594

     Barks--old dog                      1175

     Barley--St. David's                 1382

     Barrel--knock                        798

     Bartholomew--St.                     420

     Basket--one                          478

     Bat--blind                           132

     Battle--afraid                        12

     Battle--colours                      291

     Battle--hard                         498

     Beast--nature                       1133

     Beauty--fancy                        546

     Bed--early to                        463

     Bed--supperless                     1562

     Bed-fellows                          796

     Bed-fellows--poverty                1279

     Beef--buys                            86

     Bees--turned                        1679

     Beg--poor                           1358

     Beggar--quarrel                     1322

     Beggars--bite                       1810

     Beggars--eat birds                  1808

     Beggars--ride                       1809

     Beggars--wishes                     1807

     Beggar's purse                      1302

     Beggary                              837

     Bellows--windmill                   1791

     Besom--sweep                        1570

     Best day--Wednesday                 1094

     Better--good                         699

     Bide--wishes                        1809

     Bill--bites                          336

     Bind--fast                           551

     Bind--sure                          1564

     Bird--best                          1211

     Birdcall                             587

     Bird--catch                         1386

     Bird--early                          465

     Bird--fairest                        361

     Bird--old                            223

     Bird--roost                         1366

     Bird--sing                          1442

     Birds--little                        970

     Birds of prey                       1291

     Bite--bark                           442

     Bite best--fish                     1784

     Bite--beggars                       1810

     Bite--fish                          1782

     Bite--own dog                       1203

     Biters--barkers                       71

     Bitter--sweet                        829

     Bitter thing                        1535

     Blackamore                          1722

     Blackberries                        1262

     Blame--bidden                        118

     Blame--pity                         1251

     Blamed--truth                       1674

     Blessing--God                       1693

     Blind--will                         1773

     Blind horse--mettle                 1074

     Blind horse--wink                   1799

     Blind--love                         1001

     Blossom--timely                     1627

     Blow--felled                        1165

     Blow--first                          578

     Blow--second                        1410

     Blows--unkind                       1838

     Blows--wind                         1787

     Boast--great                         140

     Body--think                         1598

     Bond--honest man's                  1832

     Bone--bred                           162

     Bone--tongue                        1636

     Bones--buys                           23

     Book--author                          50

     Books--years                        1867

     Born--stable                        1514

     Born--wept                          1754

     Borrow--contented                    313

     Borrowing                           1477

     Bosom--snake                        1462

     Bottle--milk                        1076

     Bottom--bare                        1483

     Bottom--fish                         584

     Bottom--spare                       1484

     Bottom--tub                          505

     Bought wit                          1812

     Brain--idle                          832

     Brains--mob                         1091

     Branch--roost                       1366

     Brave--the                           624

     Bray--vicar of                      1703

     Bread--buttered                      182

     Bread--dry                           460

     Bread, no                            737

     Bread--eaten                         623

     Bread--snow                          544

     Breakfast                            801

     Breath--mother's                    1112

     Bride--sun                           745

     Brim--spare                         1484

     Broken at last                      1250

     Broken--promises                    1299

     Broken staff                        1667

     Broom--furze                         660

     Broth--cooks                        1506

     Brusher's--critics                   354

     Bud--nip                            1150

     Build--flit                         1213

     Build houses                         613

     Build--pull down                    1310

     Built--Rome                         1369

     Bung-holes                          1393

     Buried--rich                        1140

     Burneth--gown                        581

     Bush--beats                          122

     Bush--bird                           120

     Bush--wine                          1795

     Bushel--corn                        1058

     Business                             503

     Butter--cheese                      1075

     Butter--parsnips                    1465

     Butter-cakes                        1810

     Buttock                               63

     Buy--houses                          613

     Buyers--wool                        1831


     C

     Cable--mouse                        1620

     Cake--good                           375

     Calendar                             396

     Calends                              866

     Calf--bad                            339

     Calm--storm                         1540

     Calm sea--pilot                     1244

     Calms--vows                         1708

     Calves--fat                          229

     Camel's back                         919

     Camels--gnats                        682

     Candle--devil                        417

     Candle-stick                         195

     Candle--sport                       1509

     Candlemas--wind                     1785

     Care--coin                           287

     Care--court                          329

     Care--goods                          974

     Care--kill                           214

     Care--sings                         1444

     Cares--children                      248

     Cart--creaks                         350

     Cart-wheel                          1857

     Castle--house                        489

     Cat--care                            201

     Cat--fair words                     1842

     Cat--mercy                          1067

     Cat--old                            1173

     Cat--scalded                        1401

     Cats--muffled                       1123

     Catch bird                          1386

     Caught--thief                       1592

     Certainty                            227

     Chance--main                         226

     Change mind                         1083

     Change of weather                   1741

     Chapel of devotion                   225

     Chastening                           317

     Cheap--pity                         1251

     Cheapest--best                       111

     Cheeriman--Doctor                   1240

     Cheese--butter                      1075

     Cheese--chalk                        224

     Chickens--count                      324

     Chickens--crumbs                     366

     Chickens--curses                     371

     Chickens--picking                    244

     Child--nurse                         893

     Child--train                         239

     Children--devil's                   1013

     Children--maid's                      52

     Children--twice                     1182

     Chimneys                            1466

     Chin--swim                          1572

     Chip--stock                         1533

     Choice--the                           53

     Choosers--beggars                     97

     Christened                           687

     Churchyard--fat                      729

     Churchyard--May                      810

     City--pity                          1252

     Civility                            1117

     Clasp--one hand                     1189

     Clay--St. David's                   1382

     Clergy--wit                         1114

     Clerk--clock                         268

     Cloak--religion                     1350

     Cloth--ale                            22

     Cloth--coat                          278

     Clothes--critics                     354

     Cloud--pryeth                       1306

     Clouting--sack                      1378

     Clown--doctor                        437

     Clown--title                        1628

     Coat--gay                            279

     Cock--crows                          778

     Cock's stride                       1680

     Coin--own                           1217

     Cold--soon                          1468

     Cold water--words                   1844

     Colour--horse                        805

     Colours--treatise                    135

     Colt--ragged                        1328

     Companion--pocket                   1229

     Companions                          1372

     Company--bad                          84

     Company--fit                         938

     Comfort                              908

     Comforts                             248

     Common life                         1304

     Complain--workmen                   1849

     Confession                           305

     Confidence                          1311

     Confine--tongue                     1634

     Conjure down                        1335

     Conquer--kindness                    889

     Conscience--clear                    307

     Conscience--guilty                   735

     Conscience--stomach                 1536

     Constant dropping                   1739

     Contempt                             542

     Contention                          1578

     Cook--lazy                           828

     Cooks--broth                        1506

     Cooks--devil                         685

     Cook-shop                           1520

     Cool--good words                    1844

     Corn--April                           36

     Corn--buy                            369

     Corn--May                           1053

     Corn--measure                       1058

     Corn-bin                             207

     Corpse--rain                         745

     Cottages--love                      1003

     Cough--dry                           461

     Cough--hid                           779

     Cough--love                         1008

     Counsel--fool                        604

     Counsel--glass                       677

     Counsel--good                        702

     Counsellor--best                    1243

     Country--rich                       1365

     Courage                              852

     Courts--love                        1003

     Cow gives water                       74

     Cow--keep                           1076

     Cow--kissed                          962

     Cow--sell                            369

     Cow's horn                           181

     Cozen--cousin                        334

     Craft's master                      1043

     Craves                               410

     Crosses--Thursday                   1094

     Crown                                357

     Crows--cock                         1174

     Crows--hen                           363

     Cruel--cowards                       341

     Crumb--musician                     1127

     Crust--cat                           211

     Cry--never                          1531

     Cure--care                           200

     Cure--prevention                    1290

     Cut--nose                           1503

     Cuts--short                         1431

     Cuts--tongue                        1637


     D

     Daintiness                           820

     Dance--chance                        227

     Danger--debt                         401

     Dangerous--delays                    405

     Dark night                           918

     Daughter--little                     969

     Daughter--son                       1467

     Day--longest                         994

     Daylight--truth                     1671

     Dead--speak                         1488

     Dear--wit                           1816

     Dearth--wet                           49

     Death--cough                         461

     Death--taxes                         221

     Death's blossoms                     730

     Death's feast--war                  1715

     Debt--sorrow                        1471

     Debt--supperless                    1562

     Deceit--brimmer                      166

     Deceit--smooth                      1353

     December--thunder                   1613

     Deed--better                         116

     Deed--will                          1771

     Deeds--words                         713

     Deeds--words                        1833

     Delays--desires                      409

     Depth--out of                        406

     Depth--out of                       1573

     Deserve--success                    1556

     Desire--deserve                      408

     Despair--hope                        800

     Desperate cures                      379

     Devil--chapel                        256

     Devil--colours                       291

     Devil--cooks                         685

     Devil--horseback                      98

     Devil--imp                          1580

     Devil--knife                         944

     Devil--quote                        1327

     Devil--truth                        1672

     Devil's chaplain                    1716

     Devil's delight                      365

     Devil's luck                        1013

     Devotion--short                      822

     Die--love                           1006

     Diet--Doctor                        1240

     Digests--cheese                      233

     Dines late                          1577

     Dinner--waits                       1711

     Discretion--valour                  1697

     Disparagement                        530

     Dispraise                           1282

     Distress--company                    296

     Divine--forgive                      496

     Doctor--death                        399

     Doctor--pay                          177

     Doctor--truth                       1675

     Dog--bone                            142

     Dog--Brag                  153, 154, 155

     Dog--foremost                        619

     Dog--hanging                        1732

     Dog--hare                            787

     Dog--keep                             70

     Dog--killing                         744

     Dog--living                          986

     Dog--sleeping                       1451

     Dogs--dainty                         384

     Dogs--little                         748

     Dog's tooth                         1668

     Doing--saying                       1396

     Donkey's gallop                     1433

     Door--poverty                       1277

     Doors--housekeeper                   815

     Dowry--great                         723

     Drawer's--wine                      1794

     Dream--courtship                     333

     Drink--ale                            22

     Drink by measure                     474

     Drink--eat                           473

     Drink--horse                         808

     Drinking--appetite                   475

     Drive--plough                       1265

     Drive--women                        1349

     Dropping--constant                   308

     Drowned--born                        145

     Drowned--wilful                     1769

     Drowned--wine                       1792

     Dry--ever                            456

     Dry--well                           1729

     Due--devil                           414

     Dull boy                            1257

     Dunghill                             285

     Dust--bushel                        1029


     E

     Eagles--carcase                      198

     Eagle's eye--surgeon                1565

     Ease--honour                         796

     Ease--itch                           863

     Ease--sufferance                    1558

     East--rain                          1329

     East--too far                       1644

     East wind--fish                     1782

     East wind--man                      1786

     Easter--white                        253

     Easter day                          1330

     Easy chair--frugality                654

     Ebb--tide                           1617

     Eel--hide                            477

     Eel--sack                            780

     Eggs--reason                        1339

     Eggs--sluts                           34

     Egg-shell--wit                      1813

     Elbow-grease                         481

     Ell--inch                            853

     End--day                             994

     Ends--both                           190

     End well                             103

     Enemy--faults                        558

     Enemy--shoots                       1428

     Enemy--wine                         1797

     England--famine                      545

     Englishman--house                    208

     Englishman--mist                    1406

     Enough--ask                           42

     Enough--word                        1839

     Escutcheon                           137

     Estate--trade                       1647

     Evasions--crafty                     347

     Evening--red                         501

     Evenings--clear                      275

     Everything--place                   1254

     Evil--bear                            82

     Evil--good                           698

     Evil name                            510

     Evil--old age                       1171

     Evil--root                           839

     Exception--rule                     1374

     Experience--caution                  220

     Extravagance                        1492

     Eye--picture, mind                  1081

     Eyes--fields                         576

     Eyes--hedges                         775


     F

     Face--painting                      1061

     Face--wind                          1504

     Faces--fair                          533

     Faces--two                          1683

     Fair day--praise                    1284

     Fairest rose                        1371

     Fair lady                            529

     Fair weather                        1332

     Faith--tale-bearers                 1579

     Fall--pride                         1293

     Fall--sit still                     1445

     Fall--standing                      1517

     Fast bind                            551

     Fast-day                             100

     Fast--St. Stephen                   1383

     Fasting                              314

     Father--children                     249

     Father--like                         963

     Fat--windfalls                      1790

     Fault--amends                        304

     Fault-menders                        555

     Fault--woo                          1827

     Faults--search                      1707

     Favour--kissing                      894

     Fear--cruelty                        364

     Feast--enough                        490

     Feather--birds of a                  123

     Feathers--fine                       563

     Feet--light                         1775

     Feet--slip                          1452

     Feet--warm                          1721

     Feet--wet                            217

     Fellowship                          1278

     Fiction--truth                      1670

     Fiddle                               940

     Fiddlers--sing                      1443

     Fifer--pay                           573

     Fifer play--fiddle                   574

     Fight--flourish                      599

     Fighting                            1208

     Filth--pools                        1518

     Find--seek                          1413

     Find--sure                          1564

     Fingers--thorns                     1606

     Fire--burnt child                    172

     Fire--frying-pan                     656

     Fire--hot                            727

     Fire--house                         1144

     Fire--quench                        1323

     Fire--ships                         1425

     Fire--slow                          1021

     Fire--smoke                         1461

     Fire--sticks                        1526

     Fire--zeal                          1878

     Fires--straight                      356

     Firmness                             536

     First--be not                       1146

     First sight                          876

     Five pounds                         1320

     Five--up at                          593

     Fish--all                           1145

     Fish--bite                          1782

     Fish bite best                      1784

     Fish--cat                            217

     Fish--small--venture                1700

     Fish--small                         1458

     Fish--troubled waters               1660

     Fishes--mute                        1129

     Fishing--best                        402

     Flail--November                     1161

     Flatter                              313

     Flattereth                             7

     Fleas--catching                      756

     Flies--hungry                        825

     Flies--large                         929

     Flies--law                           928

     Flint--coldest                       290

     Flock--infects                      1399

     Flood--fortune                      1616

     Flour--fancy                         548

     Flower--patience                    1214

     Flowers--May                          38

     Flowers in May                      1746

     Fodder--barley                        74

     Fodder--morning                     1196

     Folk--poor, pottage                 1269

     Folk--poor                          1268

     Folly--wealth                       1736

     Folly--wisdom                       1804

     Folly--wit is                       1815

     Folly--zeal                         1880

     Fool--beggar                          94

     Fool--bet                            115

     Fool--demands                       1119

     Fool--fifteen                       1022

     Fool--land                           917

     Fool--money                         1100

     Fool overtakes                      1201

     Fool--play                          1258

     Fool--scholar                       1042

     Fool's argument                     1709

     Fools--feasts                        562

     Fools--fiddlers                     1443

     Fools--harms                         751

     Fools--market                       1032

     Fools--merry                         243

     Fools--mistress                      519

     Fools--old                          1178

     Fools--tie                           902

     Fools--truth                         242

     Fools--wise                         1702

     Foot--bare                            66

     Foot--shoe                          1426

     Forbear                               81

     Forearmed                            620

     Forehead--mind                      1081

     Forelock--time                      1619

     Foresee--hazards                     952

     Forget--apt to                      1298

     Forget--forego                       618

     Forget--forgive                      622

     Forget wrong                        1356

     Forgotten--seen                     1414

     Forgotten vows                      1708

     Fortune--face                        527

     Fortune--good                        424

     Fortunes--manners                   1025

     Fortune--riches                     1360

     Fortune--pipes                       381

     Fortune--tide                       1616

     Fortune--wife                       1761

     Foul heart                           534

     Four pounds                         1320

     Fox--grapes                         1479

     Foxes--old                          1179

     Fray--blow                          1410

     Free--spend                         1496

     Free--thoughts                      1608

     Frenzy--zeal                        1879

     Friday--losses                      1094

     Friday--Sunday                       639

     Friday--sing                         638

     Friend--court                        328

     Friend--faults                       558

     Friend--in need                     1138

     Friend--jest                         868

     Friend--leave                       1018

     Friend--lend                         943

     Friend--trifle                      1658

     Friend--try                         1676

     Friend--wine                        1797

     Friends--adversity                     6

     Friends--few                         891

     Friends--long                       1345

     Friends--old                        1180

     Friends--packing                     700

     Friends--poverty                    1274

     Friends--prosperity                 1301

     Friends--purse                       659

     Friends--store                       686

     Friends--trade                      1649

     Friendship--window                  1277

     Frost--hail                          736

     Frost--work                         1848

     Frosts--May                         1089

     Frugality                            855

     Fruit--flowers                       598

     Fruit--forbidden                     615

     Fruit--September                    1418

     Fruit--tree                         1654


     G

     Gain--little                        1205

     Gain--pain                          1204

     Gamesters                           1516

     Gander--sauce                       1388

     Garments                             146

     Garner--dearth                       395

     Gate--creaking                       349

     Gate--stile                         1527

     Gent--title                         1628

     Gentleman--coat                      279

     Gentleness--wife                     831

     Giblets--alms                         28

     Gladness--sadness                   1381

     Go--send                             443

     God--blessing                       1693

     God--charity                         230

     God--church                          256

     God--church                          257

     God--flax                            594

     God--for all                         504

     God--friend                          643

     God--healeth                         768

     God--inches                          854

     God--rich                           1358

     God--spender                        1497

     God--tempers                        1430

     God--trust in                       1666

     God disposes                        1023

     God will send                       1495

     Gold--balance                         60

     Gold--butter                         178

     Gold--fetters                        570

     Gold--glitters                       681

     Gold--lead                           670

     Gold--spins                          909

     Goodness--idleness                   838

     Goods--care                          974

     Goose--alms                           28

     Goose--barefoot                     1745

     Goose--lay                          1695

     Goose--sauce                        1388

     Goose--woman                        1033

     Govern--thinkers                    1600

     Grandeur--utility                   1694

     Grapes--fox                         1479

     Grass--rain                         1330

     Grave--sleeping                     1450

     Grave--teeth                        1586

     Gravity--words                      1836

     Grief--time                         1623

     Griefs--marriage                    1035

     Grin--bachelors                       51

     Grinds--lower millstone             1079

     Groat a year                        1247

     Groat--penny                        1227

     Groat--threepence                   1610

     Ground--stools                      1538


     H

     Hadland--title                      1628

     Hair--split                         1505

     Half done                            104

     Half of world                       1850

     Hand--bird                           120

     Hand--left                          1362

     Hands--master's                     1049

     Hands--pair                          777

     Hand to hand                        1373

     Handmaid of virtue                  1093

     Hang--thief                         1591

     Hanged--almost                        27

     Hanged--drowned                      145

     Hanged--half                         738

     Hanging--destiny                     411

     Hanging--dog                        1732

     Hardest work                        1157

     Hard upon hard                      1537

     Hare--breakfast                      160

     Hare--dog                            787

     Hare--run                            811

     Harm--music                         1126

     Harm--silence                       1437

     Harmony--sweetest                    669

     Harvest--August                       47

     Harvest--good                        704

     Haste--marry                        1038

     Haste--waste                        1547

     Hat--head                            764

     Hat--two faces                      1683

     Hatch--own egg                       121

     Hatched--chickens                    237

     Hatchet--tree falls                  539

     Hawk--hand-saw                       740

     Hay--April                            36

     Hay, corn and                       1053

     Hay--Easter                         1330

     Hay--load                             91

     Hay--needle                         1139

     Hay--doomsday                        444

     Hazards                              952

     Head--warm                          1721

     Head--wax                           1730

     Heads--two                          1684

     Heads differ                         771

     Heal--thyself                       1239

     Heal--wounds                        1859

     Health--mother of                   1276

     Health--Tuesday                     1094

     Health--wealth                      1764

     Hearsays                             526

     Heart--burst                         731

     Heart--grieve                        525

     Heart, mother's                     1113

     Heart--break                         802

     Heart--merry                        1068

     Heart--rues                          523

     Heart sick                           799

     Hearts ache                           51

     Hearts--true                         572

     Heat, work in                       1848

     Heaven--ladders                      360

     Heaven--lawyers                      932

     Heaven--marriages                   1036

     Heaven--time                        1409

     Heaven's gate                        692

     Hedge--neighbour                    1141

     Hedge--steal                        1523

     Heir--land                           916

     Hell--paved                          861

     Hen--moult                           283

     Hen crows                            363

     Highway--grass                       721

     Hill--valley                        1696

     Hills--clouds                        273

     Hind--bier                           194

     Hinges--gate                         349

     Hog--October                        1167

     Hold--plough                        1265

     Holdfast                             153

     Hold fast nothing                   1645

     Home--charity                        231

     Home--fool                          1258

     Home--muddles                       1122

     Home--wife                           707

     Home--wife--cheat                   1760

     Homer                               1152

     Honest--just                         881

     Honest--thunder                     1614

     Honest man                           346

     Honest man's word                   1832

     Honesty--age                          14

     Honesty--best                        898

     Honesty--craft                      1046

     Honey--bees                           92

     Honeycomb                           1535

     Honourable--old age                   15

     Hope--certainty                      222

     Hope--life                           956

     Horn--April                           36

     Horn--pig's tail                    1242

     Hornets--laws                        928

     Horse--blind                        1799

     Horse--born                         1514

     Horse--colt                         1328

     Horse--gift                          671

     Horse--passion                      1212

     Horse--steal                        1523

     Horse--stumbles                     1553

     Horse--tail                          765

     Horse--thinks                       1599

     Horse--want of                      1713

     Horse--willing                      1777

     Horseback--agues                      19

     Horseback--beggars                    98

     Horse-manger                         545

     Horse's heel                        1668

     Horses--wishes                      1807

     Host--guest                          734

     Host--reckons                       1343

     Hot--love                           1009

     Hot--soon--cold                     1468

     Hot--soon--pot                      1272

     Hot--strike                         1548

     Hounds                               180

     Hour--lose                          1108

     Hour's sleep                        1449

     House--fine                         1144

     House--thatched                     1590

     House--well-ordered                 1752

     Houses--women                        680

     Human--err                           496

     Humble--noble                       1151

     Hunger--work                        1848

     Hungry--sweet                       1535

     Hunters--horn                        804

     Hunting--trouble                    1714

     Hurt--afraid                          13

     Hurt--cry                            367

     Hurt--healed                         767

     Husband--good                       1763

     Husbands--roam                      1122


     I

     Ill--do                             1155

     Ill--doing                          1160

     Ill fortune                         1034

     Ill-luck                            1014

     Ill-taught                          1691

     Ill wed                              738

     Ill words--wounds                   1859

     Imp--devil                          1580

     Impression--youth                   1875

     Inheritance                           87

     Ink and pen                         1225

     Inscription                          358

     Instinct--woman's                    860

     Invention                           1136

     Iron--strike                        1548

     Iron Age                             694


     J

     Jack of all trades                  1651

     Jack--play                          1257

     James--Saint                         803

     Janiveer--grass                      719

     Jest--true word                     1663

     Jest not                             856

     Jewel--woman                         386

     Jill--Jack                           865

     Job--patient                        1216

     Job--poor                           1267

     Joys                                1035

     July--bees                            91

     June--corn                           316

     June--dripping                       462

     June--weather                        188

     Justice--clerk                       262


     K

     Kernel                               344

     Kettle--black                       1273

     Keys of the year                      35

     Kill--dog                           1732

     Kindred--poor                       1268

     Kindred--trade                      1649

     King--cat                            210

     King's guard                        1554

     King's horses                         46

     King's ransom                       1029

     Kingdom                              318

     Kisses--stolen                      1534

     Kitchen--dinner                      426

     Kitchen--fat                         895

     Kitten--laps                        1173

     Knife--devil                         944

     Knight--strongest                     73

     Knowledge--decreaseth                797

     Knowledge--folly                    1880

     Knowledge--frenzy                   1879

     Knowledge--zeal                     1878


     L

     Labour--seek                        1413

     Lack--love                          1000

     Lad--unhappy                        1687

     Ladder--crosses                      359

     Ladders--step                        912

     Lade--nutshell                      1164

     Ladle--sceptre                      1402

     Lady's hand--surgeon                1565

     Lamb--hung                           819

     Land--money                         1286

     Land--little                         976

     Lands--words                        1834

     Lane--long                           992

     Larks--lovers                       1010

     Last--cobbler                        281

     Last, be not                        1146

     Laugh--hearts ache                    51

     Law--costly                           17

     Law--necessity                      1134

     Law--possession                     1271

     Law--trouble                        1714

     Laws--lords                          996

     Law breakers                         927

     Lawyer--hide                         781

     Lawyer--truth                       1675

     Lawyer--young                        438

     Lazy--long                           531

     Lead--balance                         60

     Lead--butter                         178

     Lead--gold                           670

     Leaf--grave                          651

     Lean--sorrow                        1472

     Leap--look                           989

     Leaves--tree                        1654

     Leeks--lovers                       1010

     Leisure                              833

     Lenders--bad                        1498

     Lent--salmon                        1385

     Liberty--marries                    1037

     Lie, many a                          747

     Life--quiet                         1326

     Lifeguard, king's                   1554

     Life--end                           1499

     Light--zeal                         1878

     Light heart                         1319

     Light suppers                       1563

     Light work                          1026

     Lightning--wit                      1811

     Liking--life                         955

     Link--think                         1598

     Lion, dead                           970

     Lion, dead--dog                      986

     Lion's heart--surgeon               1565

     Liquors--weak                        977

     Little and little                   1460

     Little--loud                         531

     Little strokes                      1549

     Live, eat to                         472

     Lives, nine                          214

     Lives on wit                        1817

     Load--willing horse                 1777

     Lock--gold                           693

     Loft--fruit                         1418

     Logs                                 356

     London--news                         326

     Long lives--suppers                 1563

     Longest--short cuts                 1431

     Lordship                             569

     Lose--substance                     1420

     Lose all                             717

     Lose last                           1780

     Losses--Friday                      1094

     Lost--occasion                      1166

     Lost all                            1121

     Loud--little                         531

     Love--faith                          536

     Love--lordship                       569

     Love--quietness                     1325

     Love rules                          1375

     Love--self                          1416

     Love, subjects'                     1554

     Loves--dearly                       1235

     Loves not                           1491

     Luck, ill                            847

     Luck--Saturday                      1094

     Lurch--friend                       1018


     M

     Madness                              676

     Mahomet                             1116

     Maid--children                        52

     Maid--honest                         707

     Maids--dun                          1027

     Maladies--much                      1059

     Man--head                            763

     Manners--good                        506

     Manners--meat                       1060

     March--April                          37

     March--bridge                        565

     March--frosts                        650

     March--mists                        1089

     March--windy                        1052

     March grass                          718

     Mare to go                          1102

     Market--fool                        1258

     Market--rate                        1030

     Married--needy                      1140

     Married, newly                      1766

     Marries--son                         388

     Marry--bad                          1040

     Marry--match                        1044

     Master--fire                         580

     Master--marry                       1044

     Master--purse                       1314

     Master--trades                      1651

     Master-blow                         1354

     Master-craft                         346

     Master-craft                        1046

     Masters, good                       1419

     Master's--wine                      1794

     Maxim--good                          705

     May and April                         35

     May--beautiful                      1052

     May--bees                             91

     May--cold                           1053

     May--corn                            316

     May--frosts                          650

     May--frosts--mists                  1089

     May--hot                             810

     May--marry                          1040

     May--merry                          1073

     May--shear                          1423

     May--sows                           1481

     May--sun                            1027

     May--weather                         866

     May--welcome                        1746

     May--wind                           1785

     May flood                            597

     May flowers                           38

     Meal--little                         158

     Meal--mill                          1077

     Measure--strife                     1546

     Meat--ale                             22

     Meat--best                           343

     Meat--cooks                          685

     Meat--merry                         1070

     Meat--mouths                        1118

     Meat--quick                         1324

     Meat--sweet                         1389

     Meddling                             476

     Meet--old friends                   1180

     Memories                             352

     Memory--liar                         945

     Memory--wolves                      1821

     Men, old                             422

     Men--reins                          1349

     Mend--worst                         1856

     Mice--cat's away                     209

     Mice--catch                          213

     Mile--miss                          1088

     Mill--grind                          732

     Mills--clouds                        273

     Mind--picture                       1081

     Mind--sight                         1436

     Mind--speech                        1493

     Mind--think                         1598

     Mind--wit                           1811

     Minds, little--soured                977

     Minds--little things                 978

     Minds--light                        1459

     Minister--hide                       781

     Minute too late                     1641

     Misfortune--watch                   1725

     Mist--Scotch                        1406

     Mole                                  39

     Mole-hill                           1115

     Monday--Christmas                    255

     Money buys land                     1834

     Money--land                         1286

     Money--ready                        1336

     Money--spots                        1511

     Money--trade                        1650

     Monk--devil                          419

     More--much                          1121

     Moon                                 106

     Morning, bit in the                  128

     Morning--cloudy                      457

     Morning, cloudy--moon               1104

     Morning--fodder                     1196

     Morning--grey                        501

     Morning--law                         925

     Morning--study                      1550

     Mornings--cloudy                     275

     Mortals--success                    1556

     Moss--stone                         1367

     Mote--self-love                     1416

     Mother--daughter                     389

     Mother--little                       969

     Mother--necessity                   1136

     Mother--poverty                     1454

     Mother of money                     1650

     Mother's blessing                    240

     Mouse--cable                        1620

     Mouse--cat sees                      212

     Mouse--cat winketh                   215

     Mouse--drowned                       455

     Mouse--one hole                     1190

     Mouse--plough                       1263

     Mouth--close                         269

     Mouth--fishes'                       589

     Mouth--melt                          179

     Mouth--spoon                        1441

     Mow--early                           464

     Muck--riches                        1359

     Mud--beans                            78

     Mud--clear                           261

     Mushroom                             560


     N

     Nag                                  297

     Nail--door                           391

     Nail--second                         452

     Nail--want of                       1713

     Name, good--life                    1132

     Name, good--riches                  1130

     Neighbour--evil                      931

     Nest--defile                         842

     Nettle--dock                         436

     Newcastle                            205

     News--country                        326

     Night--good                           55

     Night--law                           925

     Night--stumble                      1551

     Nine days' wonder                   1826

     Ninepence                           1149

     Nine points                         1271

     Nineteen--twenty                    1681

     No--woman's                         1868

     Nod--wink                           1799

     Noland--title                       1628

     Note--music                         1127

     Nothing--cheese                      234

     Nothing--children                    246

     Nothing--promise                    1296

     North--wind                         1781

     Nose--off                           1503

     Nothing--venture                    1699

     Nut--crack                           344

     Nut--sound                          1478

     Nuts--sluts                           34


     O

     Oak                                  454

     Oaks--great                         1549

     Oats                                 867

     Oats--St. David's                   1382

     Oats--wild                          1767

     Obey                                 149

     Office--Jack                         864

     Oil, in fire                        1323

     Old--learn                           937

     Old--long                           1870

     Old--needy                           835

     Old--spare                          1485

     Old age                              654

     Old block                            251

     Old men--woo                        1827

     Old praise                          1285

     Old saws                            1040

     Old sore                            1185

     Old tree                            1351

     Old wife                            1137

     Old wine                            1181

     Old young                           1870

     Order                               1347

     Ornament--silence                   1439

     Ounce--mischief                     1086

     "Our Father"                         258

     Overcome                             487

     Owl--lantern                         918

     Ox--drink                            450

     Ox--steal                           1521

     Oxen--plough                        1264


     P

     Pack--own                           1224

     Pack--small                         1223

     Padlock--wedlock                    1743

     Pain--pride                         1292

     Pains--gains                         661

     Pains--idle                          834

     Pains--lazy folk                     933

     Paint--faces                         533

     Painting--face                      1061

     Pair--couple 327

     Paradise                             488

     Pardons--offender                   1169

     Parleys--valour                     1698

     Parsnips--fair words                1841

     Parsnips--soft words                1465

     Passions--absence                      1

     Pasture--change of                   229

     Pater-noster--churches               258

     Path--puddle                        1307

     Patrimony--diligence                 423

     Paul--Peter                         1238

     Pause--bargain                        69

     Pay--sorrow                         1471

     Pay--too dear                       1756

     Pay--Yorkshire                      1869

     Peace--war                          1717

     Peace--wisdom                       1802

     Peas--like                           961

     Peasant--wretch                     1863

     Peck--of ashes                        41

     Pence--care of                       202

     Penny--companion                     298

     Penny--for friend                    830

     Penny--shilling                     1500

     Perform--quick                      1297

     Peter--Paul                         1238

     Philosopher's stone                  310

     Physic--ague                          18

     Physic--plague                       907

     Physic--temperance                  1587

     Physician--defy                      567

     Physician--fool                      606

     Physician--hide                      781

     Physician--thanks                    768

     Picture--speech                     1493

     Pie-crusts                          1299

     Pig--child's                         241

     Pig's tail--horn                    1242

     Pilot--calm sea                      187

     Pin--steal                          1522

     Pinch--friend                       1337

     Pinches--shoe                       1427

     Pitchers--ears                       466

     Pitied--envied                       493

     Place--sit in                       1253

     Places--two                         1685

     Plaister--patience                  1215

     Plant--removed                      1352

     Play--cards                          199

     Pleasure--tax                        431

     Pleasure--woo                       1827

     Plentiful--pity                     1251

     Plenty--peace                       1802

     Poison--weed                         127

     Poke--pig                            183

     Policy--honesty                      793

     Poor--beg                           1358

     Poor--giving to                      675

     Poor--honour                         795

     Poor man's table                    1576

     Pope--would be                      1270

     Pot--ladle                           911

     Pot--watched                        1727

     Pottage--other's                    1400

     Pottage--poor                       1269

     Pottage--prettiness                 1288

     Pottage--sluts                      1457

     Pottle--hay                         1139

     Pound foolish                       1232

     Pound--in for                       1230

     Pound--mischief                     1086

     Pounds--care of                      202

     Pounds--pence                       1226

     Pours--rains                        1334

     Poverty--debt                        400

     Poverty--sloth                      1454

     Powder--trust                       1666

     Power--knowledge                     904

     Praise--self                        1417

     Precept--example                     514

     Prickles--thistles                  1601

     Pride--ingratitude                   857

     Prince--sword                       1575

     Prince--wretch                      1863

     Privilege--folly                    1736

     Prize--wife                         1765

     Profit--pains                       1206

     Promises--pity                      1251

     Prosperity--friends                  645

     Prosperity--gold                     690

     Proud--black and                     531

     Proud--cock                          285

     Provender--carry                     807

     Provident--harvests                  704

     Puddings--dirty                      384

     Pudding--end                         486

     Pudding--proof                      1300

     Pulse--world's                      1854

     Purse--ask thy                        43

     Purse--courtesy                      331

     Purse--empty                         484

     Purse--fills                        1170

     Purse--heavy                         960

     Purse--little                        968

     Purse--no money                     1103

     Purse--penny                        1228


     Q

     Quarrels--tools                     1642

     Quart--neighbour                    1142

     Quick--markets                      1718

     Quick--perform                      1297

     Quiet--Doctor                       1240


     R

     R--oysters                          1202

     Rain--Candlemas                      192

     Rain--corpse                         745

     Raven--starling                      129

     Reason--bluster                      139

     Reason--will                        1773

     Reasoning--man's                     860

     Rebellion--oppression               1194

     Reckoning--feast                     561

     Reckonings--short                   1432

     Repent--marry                       1038

     Repent--trust                       1665

     Repentance--late                     309

     Rest--rain                          1331

     Revenge--best                        621

     Reversion--kingdom                   318

     Reward--desert                       407

     Ribs--birchen twigs                  119

     Rich--adversity                        5

     Rich--die                           1266

     Rich--fifty                          741

     Rich--lucky                         1015

     Rich--shame                          795

     Riches--children                     245

     Riches--name                        1130

     Rider--lost                         1713

     Rider--time                         1625

     Right--two wrongs                   1864

     Rise--early to                       463

     Rise at five                        1612

     Road--companion                      297

     Roast--small                         140

     Roast beef                           460

     Roasting--eggs                      1339

     Robbery--exchange                    515

     Robs Peter                          1238

     Rock--ruled by                      1370

     Rogues--laws                         930

     Rolling stone                       1367

     Roost--curses                        371

     Roots--crooked                      1543

     Rope enough                         1591

     Ropes--sand                         1387

     Rose--thorn                         1603

     Roses--thorns                       1605

     Ruins--youth                        1099

     Ruins of folly                      1804

     Rules--woman                        1348

     Runs--stumbles                      1551

     Rushes--good words                   713


     S

     Saddle--colt                         292

     Sail--Friday                         640

     Sail--sea                           1407

     Salt--advice                           8

     Salt of life                         173

     Sands--words                        1834

     Satins--kitchen                      897

     Saturday--no luck                   1094

     Saturday--wife                      1759

     Sauce--hunger                        824

     Save--spend                         1494

     Save--youth                         1874

     Saved--penny                        1231

     Saving--alchemy                       21

     Sawyers--top                        1646

     Sayings--thrifty                    1611

     Scarce--good men                    1188

     Scholar--mere                       1403

     Scholar--fool                       1042

     Scripture--quote                    1327

     Sea--calm                            187

     Sea--fish                            588

     Sea--lade                           1164

     Sea--luck                           1012

     Sea--pray                           1287

     Second nature                       1692

     Second thoughts                     1607

     Seed, good                           512

     Seen--seldom                        1414

     Send--go                             443

     Send--sigh                          1435

     Sermon--salmon                      1385

     Servants, good                      1419

     Seven--rise at                      1612

     Seven years                          228

     Shadow--crooked                      355

     Shadow--light                        958

     Shadow--sunshine                    1561

     Shame--devil                        1672

     Shame--pride                        1294

     Shave--hand-saw                      739

     Shaven--bald head                     61

     Sheep--buy                           369

     Sheep--hung                          819

     Sheep--scabbed                      1399

     Sheep--shear                        1423

     Sheep--shorn                        1430

     Shells--eggs                          23

     Shilling--slow                      1149

     Shilling--spends                    1500

     Ship--crazy                          348

     Ship--great                          726

     Ship--leak                           936

     Ship--own                            197

     Ship--sail                          1384

     Ship--stocks                         877

     Ship--tar                           1507

     Ships--November                     1161

     Shipwreck--complain                  300

     Shirt, ragged                       1256

     Shoe, finest                        1426

     Shoe fits                            592

     Shoe pinches                        1248

     Shoe, want of                       1713

     Shot--bolt                           612

     Shovel--silver                       935

     Shower--drops                        453

     Sick--devil                          419

     Sickness--devotion                   225

     Silent--man                         1528

     Silent--speak                       1487

     Silver--butter                       178

     Silver lining--cloud                 271

     Silver--white                       1440

     Sing--birds                         1291

     Sing--can                            124

     Sing--say                           1395

     Sings--Friday                        638

     Sin, none without                   1312

     Sin--sorrow                         1473

     Sink--leak                           936

     Sit--awhile                          425

     Sit--lowly                          1011

     Sit still                           1445

     Skin deep--beauty                     88

     Slander--confession                  303

     Slave--secret                       1411

     Sleep on it                         1243

     Sloe-tree--barley                     72

     Sloth--harms                         910

     Sloven                              1457

     Slow--promise                       1297

     Sluts, eat after                      34

     Smack--pepper                       1233

     Smell--kitchen                       896

     Snow--bread                          544

     Snow--lies                           193

     Snow--water                          141

     Soberness--conceals                  459

     Soft answer                         1861

     Soft upon soft                      1537

     Solomon--wife                       1765

     Son--like                            963

     Son--marries                         388

     Sore eye--elbow                      480

     Sore--store                         1541

     Sores--patience                     1215

     Sorrow--joy                          875

     Sorrow--lies                         870

     Sorrow--mirth                       1084

     Sorrow--time                        1624

     Sorrows--less                        427

     Soul--cleansed                       317

     Souls--large                         972

     Sour--sauce                          871

     Sour--sweet                         1571

     Sow--wrong                          1865

     Sow's ear--purse                    1315

     Spain--wine                          450

     Spaniel--beaten                       85

     Speak little                        1597

     Speak once--think                   1596

     Speak--purse                         658

     Speak--spare                        1486

     Speak--think                        1595

     Speak--well                         1489

     Speakers--dead                      1241

     Speed--worse                         753

     Spend--old                          1485

     Spend--spare                        1486

     Spending--bung-hole                 1393

     Spiders' webs--laws                  929

     Spigot--saving                      1393

     Spirits--raise                      1335

     Spite--nose                         1503

     Spoon--silver                       1441

     Spring--swallow                     1567

     Spur--free horse                    1513

     Spur--horse                          806

     Stable door                          988

     Stable door                         1524

     Staff--dog                            83

     Staggerer--lame                      914

     Starling--raven                      129

     Steed starves                        720

     Steed--stolen                        988

     Steel--tongue                       1637

     Steeple--bell                        108

     Sting you--snake                    1462

     Stink--bear                          250

     Stinking fish                       1531

     Stocking                             167

     Stolen--steed                       1524

     Stone--dropping                      308

     Stone--blood                         136

     Stone--rugged                       1373

     Stool--guest                         733

     Stool, own--guest                   1476

     Stoop for pin                       1245

     Storms--vows                        1708

     Story--re-telling                   1355

     Straw--drowning                      449

     Straw--last                          919

     Strength, woman's                   1822

     Strong--thirty                       741

     Strife--poverty                     1275

     Substance                           1420

     Sudden falls                         265

     Summer--chimneys                    1466

     Summer--good                        1800

     Summer--swallow                     1566

     Sun--bride                           745

     Sun--clouds                          272

     Sun--hay                             762

     Sun--light                           959

     Sun--morning                        1109

     Sun riseth                           325

     Sunday--Friday                       639

     Sunday--weep                         638

     Sunday--wife                        1759

     Sundays--two                        1686

     Sun shines--moon                    1106

     Sunshine--stars                     1519

     Supper, after                        425

     Supper--hope                         801

     Supperless--bed                     1562

     Sure card                            307

     Surely--softly                      1464

     Sweet--taste                        1583

     Sweetest water                      1753

     Swim--depth                          406

     Swine--pearls                       1221

     Swine--turned                       1679

     Swing--youth                        1876

     Swords--words                       1835


     T

     Tail--salt                          1386

     Tale--tell                           394

     Talk--good                           696

     Talk--nurse                         1163

     Talks--tongue                       1638

     Tame Shrew                          1434

     Tame--wedding                       1742

     Tar--ship                           1507

     Tarry--tide                         1622

     Taste--kitchen                       896

     Tax--disease                         431

     Taxes--death                         221

     Teaching--child                      161

     Teeth--aching                          4

     Teeth--tongue                       1635

     Teeth--wolves                       1821

     Temper--tongue                      1633

     Tempers--God                        1430

     Tenant--bad                          482

     Tenants--ill                           4

     Texts--proverbs                     1304

     Thief of time                       1295

     Thief--opportunity                  1192

     Thief--receiver                     1340

     Thief--receivers                    1341

     Thief--thunder                      1614

     Think--live                         1598

     Thinks--says                        1397

     Thirty years                         606

     Thistles--brain                      157

     Thistles--harvest                    752

     Thorn--cuckoo                        369

     Thorns--barefoot                      65

     Thorns--dancing                      382

     Thread--draw                         448

     Thread--breaketh                    1735

     Three women                         1033

     Thrift--ruin                        1501

     Thrive--up at five                   593

     Thrive--plant                       1352

     Thrive--wive                        1818

     Thrown--wrestle                     1862

     Throws--horse                       1361

     Thrushes--beggars                   1808

     Thunder-bolt--pryeth                1306

     Thursday--crosses                   1094

     Tide--tarry                         1622

     Timber--split                        716

     Time for study                      1550

     Time--season                        1409

     Time--sorrow                        1474

     Time--stitch                        1532

     Times--fault                         553

     Toil--pleasure                      1261

     Toilers--thinkers                   1600

     Toll--market                        1031

     Toll--talking                       1582

     Tom--play                           1256

     Tongue--shorter                      468

     Tongue--knot                         901

     Tongue--nurse's                     1163

     Tongue--slip                        1452

     Tongue speaketh                      770

     Tongue--strength                    1822

     Too late--advice                      11

     Too late--never                     1064

     Tools--edged                         476

     Tools--workmen                      1849

     Toothache--music                    1125

     Touchstone--love                    1002

     Trade--two of a                       16

     Trash--beggary                        99

     Tread on worm                       1855

     Treasurer--God                      1497

     Tree--crooked                        355

     Tree--falls                          539

     Tree--fruit                          652

     Trees--straight                     1543

     Trials--present                     1346

     Tricks--old dog                     1176

     Tries--time                         1626

     Trifles--troubles                   1661

     Trouble--bagpipe                      57

     Trouble--company in                  295

     Trouble--hunting                    1714

     Troubles--company                    296

     Troubles--dowry                      723

     Trough--own                         1480

     Trumpery--beggary                     99

     Trumpet--own                        1283

     Truss up wit                        1813

     Trust--speak fair                   1491

     Trust--try                          1676

     Trust not--water                    1528

     Truth--drunken folk                  458

     Truth--evasions                      347

     Truth--fools                         242

     Truth--libel                         947

     Truth--old saws                     1184

     Try--trust                          1665

     Tuesday--health                     1094

     Turncoat--wine                      1797

     Twig--bend                           109

     Twig--tree                           110

     Tyrant--cruelty                      364


     U

     Unbidden guest                      1476

     Unkindness--cut                      377

     Unmissed--unknown                   1689

     Use--keep                            882

     Use--nature                         1692


     V

     Valour--stratagem                   1544

     Venice Glass                         351

     Vessels--empty                       485

     Virtue--modesty                     1093

     Virtue--necessity                   1135

     Virtue's colour                      138

     Virtue--touchstone                  1002


     W

     Wait--world                         1851

     Walk a mile                          425

     Walk--sun                           1730

     Wall--weakest                       1734

     Walls--ears                          467

     Walnut tree                           85

     Waste, wilful                       1724

     Want--strife                        1547

     Want, woeful                        1724

     Want not                            1723

     Ware--pleasing                      1260

     Ware--sell                          1030

     Washing--crow                        362

     Washing--face                       1061

     Waste--haste                         755

     Waste--spend                        1496

     Waste--want                         1547

     Water--cat                          1401

     Water--deepest                       402

     Water--drink                         450

     Water--famine                        544

     Water--fire                          580

     Water--wine                         1792

     Waters--deep                         726

     Waters--still                       1530

     Waters--troubled                     591

     Way--will                           1776

     Wealth--contentment                  315

     Wealth--marries                     1037

     Wealth--wife                        1764

     Wealth--Monday                      1094

     Wealthy--wise                       1805

     Weapon--wit                         1814

     Weary--well-doing                   1751

     Weather--bad                        1470

     Weather--calm                        879

     Weather--fair                       1740

     Weather--rainy                       880

     Weather--thunder                    1613

     Weather--wind                       1789

     Wedded life                           76

     Wedlock--wake                        333

     Wednesday--best day                 1094

     Weed--poison                         127

     Weeds--words                        1833

     Weight--strife                      1546

     Weights--words                      1836

     Well done--once                     1187

     Well--dry                           1729

     Well--truth                         1669

     Weep--Sunday                         638

     Weeping Cross                        998

     Wet--mist                           1406

     Whale--sprat                        1512

     Wickedness--woe                     1819

     Wife--bier                           194

     Wife--gentle                         831

     Wife--grumbles                      1553

     Wife--good terms                    1536

     Wife--key                            885

     Wife, little                         976

     Wife, one good                      1762

     Wife--son                           1467

     Wiles, caught by                    1768

     Will--way                           1731

     Will--lean                           895

     Will, woman's                       1825

     Win--laugh                           921

     Wind--against                       1504

     Wind--puff not                      1308

     Wind--sheep                         1430

     Wind--south [fishing]                589

     Wind--words                         1838

     Window                              1277

     Winds--contrary                      348

     Winds--high                          783

     Winds--March                          38

     Winds--rain                          688

     Wine--barrel                          75

     Wine--counsels                       320

     Wine--old                           1180

     Wings--covers me                     336

     Wings--flying                        600

     Winter--Candlemas                    192

     Winter--green                        729

     Winter--warm                        1720

     Winter--woodcock, one               1828

     Winter--woodcock                    1567

     Winter wind                         1082

     Wisdom--husband                      831

     Wisdom--age                          905

     Wise--adversity                        5

     Wise--some                          1197

     Wise--word enough                   1839

     Wise--forty                          741

     Wise--himself                        785

     Wise--lucky                         1016

     Wise--merry                         1069

     Wise--penny                         1232

     Wise--twice                         1682

     Wise folk                            611

     Wishers and woulders                 814

     Wist, had I                          117

     Wit--brevity                         163

     Wit, mother                         1114

     Wit, need of                         673

     Wit--pound of                        430

     Wit--sloth                          1453

     Wit is out                          1796

     Wit's plough                        1225

     Wiving--counsel                      321

     Wiving--destiny                      411

     Woe--angry men                        31

     Woe--hasty men                       757

     Woe--wilful man                     1770

     Wolf--growing youth                 1873

     Woman--beaten                         85

     Woman--fair                          386

     Woman--head                          763

     Woman--rules                        1348

     Woman--silence                      1439

     Woman--tongue                       1639

     Woman--weep                         1745

     Woman's mind                        1082

     Woman's tongue                       913

     Woman's work                        1823

     Woman's yes                         1868

     Women--discreet                      429

     Women--drive                        1349

     Women--England                       488

     Women--glasses                       680

     Women--turned                       1679

     Women--words                        1837

     Wood--beans                           78

     Wood--old                           1180

     Wood--out of                         791

     Wood--trees                         1657

     Woodcock--winter              1567, 1828

     Woodcock's thigh                    1211

     Woods--ears                          576

     Wool--little                         368

     Wool--shaving                       1422

     Word--true                          1663

     Words--leaves                        403

     Words--soft                         1465

     Words--wranglers                    1860

     Words swim                          1793

     Work--all                           1257

     Work--play                          1256

     Work--quick                         1324

     Work--slavery                       1448

     Work--woman's                       1823

     Workman--bad                        1642

     Workman--tools                      1643

     Work on                              470

     Workshops--devil's                   832

     World--enjoys it                     714

     World--fashion                       550

     World's end                          872

     Worm--bird                           465

     Worth--spend                        1499

     Worth--want                         1712

     Worthy--parents                     1210

     Wound--green                         728

     Wound--words                        1835

     Wound--evil                          510

     Wounds--afraid of                     12

     Wrinkled--faces                     1321

     Wrinkles--purse                      483

     Wrong--forget                       1356

     Wrong--losers                        997


     Y

     Young--idle                          835

     Young--spare                        1485

     Young men--die                       422

     Young men--woo                      1827

     Youth--follies                       601

     Youth--money                        1099

     Youth--old age                      1171

     Youth--reckless                     1342

     Youth--save                         1390

     Youth--time                         1625


THE END.




                           A DICTIONARY OF
                           DAILY BLUNDERS.

           _Containing a Collection of Mistakes often made
                      in Speaking and Writing._

                 CORRECTED FROM THE BEST AUTHORITIES,

                  AND ARRANGED IN ALPHABETICAL ORDER

                           BY THE AUTHOR OF

                     'A HANDY BOOK OF SYNONYMS,'
            'A DICTIONARY OF ENGLISH PROVERBS,' ETC. ETC.

      Price 1s. cloth; 1s. 6d. half-bound in leather, red edges.


EXTRACTS FROM OPINIONS OF THE PRESS.

Useful knowledge. . . . Invaluable alike as desk or pocket companion.
. . . Treats of the multitude of errors daily made in speaking and
writing, and offers corrections collected from the best authorities. Its
dictionary form enables any one in doubt to readily turn to the word
required. . . . Its value and necessity are unquestionable.--_Morning
Post._

A dictionary has just been published, enumerating the common blunders of
speech and writing, which are constantly perpetrated. Such a work seems,
at first sight, a very formidable undertaking, and the complete mastery
of its text promises many a wretched quarter of an hour to those on whom
its valuable information is inflicted. . . . There are some mistakes
which appear to be ineradicable, and will not be corrected, even if the
Blunder Dictionary arrives at its thousandth edition. . . . Next to the
slave who attended a Roman Emperor in triumph to remind him that he was
mortal . . . surely the object most to be dreaded is the editor of a
Dictionary of Blunders, arranged on such a complete and systematic
plan, as to form a court of appeal to which every household can be
conveniently referred. . . . The volume is actually published, and
contains 126 closely printed pages, containing examples of errors that
are to be found in the daily speech even of well-educated persons. . . .
The Editor is to be thanked for his useful book.--_Daily Telegraph._

Pleasantly written. . . . In its dimensions it is handy, and the utility
of its contents is beyond question. The legion of "self-educated" men
who adorn our age should not be without this useful companion, for, by
its aid, the blunders of speech more particularly common to them would
be advantageously avoided.--_Citizen._

So far as we can discover from a brief perusal of the handy little
volume, the author's work has been very well done.--_AthenÃ¦um._

A well-meant attempt to keep people clear of some common errors. . . .
There is certainly evidence enough, of one kind or another, in the
volume before us, of the existence of blunders which could hardly have
been suspected.--_Saturday Review._

Beautifully printed. . . . may be confidently recommended to those for
whose use it is designed.--_Manchester Guardian._

. . . Of value, and worth knowing. . . . Amusing, and to an extent,
useful also.--_Dublin Freeman's Journal._

Will be found useful and amusing. . . . It is arranged alphabetically,
and contains a considerable vocabulary of words supposed to present a
difficulty either in spelling, meaning, or pronunciation. Some of the
comments on popular mistakes are very well done.--_Record._

Those who are not quite sure as to their grammar, their pronunciation,
or their spelling, will doubtless find this pocket volume very
useful.--_Sunday Times._

Will be of use to every one who has either to speak or to write. As this
embraces all mankind, the book may be said to be of value to everybody.
Very neatly got up.--_Scotsman._

A glance through the pages of this book is very amusing, almost as
entertaining as a selection of wit and humour would be. There is no
doubt as to the general accuracy and usefulness of the corrections.
. . . . We heartily recommend the Dictionary.--_Liverpool Albion._

Corrected from the best authorities and arranged in alphabetical
order. . . . The student can turn readily to the remarks made upon any
particular mistake.--_Dublin Evening Mail._

A useful aid to correct speech.--_Literary World._

The value of a book is not always to be reckoned by its size. This
little dictionary would go into the waistcoat pocket, yet every word in
it has its value, and the common mistakes in speaking and writing which
it undertakes to correct are nearly always put right in the best way. In
a few instances in which we are inclined to criticise, a conflict of
opinion among the authorities would probably be found to
exist.--_Bookseller._

A manual such as this will not be out of place at the right hand of all
who desire not to blunder.--_Dundee Advertiser._

An excellent little book, which cannot be too well known or too widely
circulated. We know a large number of persons who would preserve
themselves from perpetrating the most unfortunate blunders if they would
carefully consult it.--_Christian World._

The compiler of _A Dictionary of Daily Blunders_ at least deserves
credit for an excellent idea. . . . Even the most practised speaker or
writer is liable to momentary uncertainty about simple points of
pronunciation or spelling--not to say construction of sentences. . . .
Contains some good material. . . . A useful feature of the book is the
publication in full of participles, in the spelling of which a writer is
often apt to get confused, and which are rarely included in
dictionaries.--_Nottingham Guardian._

Evidently at great pains, the author of this useful handbook has brought
together a large number of blunders which are heard often in speaking
and seen in writing. We have gone rather minutely over the work, and can
say that the corrections are nearly all just. . . . The book will be
useful to many, and the reader will be surprised to find in what a great
number of instances he is wrong in the usage and pronunciation of words.
We recommend this handbook heartily.--_Dundee Courier._

We can speak highly of this publication. . . . A credit to the publishers,
and we have little doubt will have a very large circulation.--_Wigan
Observer._

The selection has been very judiciously made. One must be a remarkably
faultless speaker and writer who does not get several useful hints from
this booklet.--_Aberdeen Journal._

. . . There is in this small volume a good deal of really useful matter,
and many readers (especially among those who are also writers) might
derive more benefit from its study than would by themselves be
imagined.--_Exchange._




_Excerpts from the Press Notices of Familiar Latin Quotations and
Proverbs._


A translation of the Latin phrases which are of most common use in the
literature of the day, which is likely to be useful.--_The Echo._

In a cheap and handy little volume we have here a large selection of
Latin phrases, proverbs, and quotations. It is ample in all respects,
and is likely to be of great and general utility.--_Sunday Times._

To newspaper men, public speakers, and correspondents in every
direction, this little "Vade mecum" will prove most
useful.--_News-Vendor._

The English translations are given as literally as possible, and they
frequently embrace all the most generally accepted renderings. So far as
we have been able to detect, the book has been carefully edited by a
competent and capable writer.--_Railway Fly-Sheet._

A small work of reference such as has been greatly needed. We recommend
it especially to all readers who want to understand what they read, and
do not know Latin, and to all writers who want to seem more learned than
they are.--_Civil Service Review._

A very handy selection of "Familiar Latin Quotations and Proverbs," of
which not only translations but also explanations are given. We
confidently recommend this little book.--_Printers' Register._

A very handy little book. It contains, arranged in alphabetical order,
all the most common Latin quotations with their signification, and many
which are not so well known. The author has been careful in doing his
work, and has produced a really good little book of
reference.--_Scotsman._

To those whose classical education has been wholly neglected the work
will be found to be a suitable "Vade mecum," and even to those who
learnt a good deal of Latin at school it will be found to be highly
useful.--_North British Advertiser._

It is a most admirable compilation. We can heartily recommend it as a
book of reference, and from which most genuine instruction can be
extracted.--_Glasgow Citizen._

In this handy little book the compiler has collected the Latin
quotations which occur most frequently in the serial literature of the
day, arranging them alphabetically along with translations. This is
truly a "handy referential volume," and deserving of a large
sale.--_Edinburgh Courant._

A very useful little work which will be invaluable to the reader whose
studies have not included the classic languages. In the space of 120
pages are compressed no fewer than fifteen hundred Latin words, phrases,
and proverbs, frequently met with in newspapers, political or
philosophical works, law books, etc. We have looked over the book
carefully, and tested it by searching for less usual quotations; but in
every case we have found what we sought. Each phrase is rendered as
literally as the construction of the English and Latin languages will
admit; and where necessary a paraphrase or explanation is appended in
addition.--_Irish Times._




_FAMILIAR ENGLISH QUOTATIONS._


The object of this little volume is to trace the Familiar Quotations so
constantly in use to their proper authorship, and to correct the errors
so frequently made by public speakers and writers. The origin of such
everyday sayings as

     "He that fights and runs away,
     May turn and fight another day,"

(erroneously supposed to be in Butler's "Hudibras,") and a number of
other phrases of a like character, is given, and the _exact place_ of
them in the different authors' works is recorded.

The errors constantly made in quoting are remarkable. The author of
an interesting volume, comprising many well-known passages, names
"Hudibras" as containing the lines

     "They that in quarrels interpose,
     Will often wipe a bloody nose."

In an essay on "Misquotations," which recently appeared in a very ably
conducted newspaper, the object of the writer being to _correct_ the
blunders constantly made, he falls into the usual mistake of quoting
Nat. Lee as writing

     "When Greek meets Greek, then comes the tug of war,"

and a learned and eminent divine, a certain Dr. B., some years ago, in
the presence of a large party, obstinately insisted that

     "A man convinced against his will"

was a correct passage from "Hudibras," and was only satisfied as to his
blunder by the production of Butler's immortal work. Even so
accomplished a scholar as Mr. Gladstone--_quandoque bonus dormitat
Homerus_--errs; in a recently published number of the _Nineteenth
Century_, quoting Byron's words,

     "The bubbling cry
     Of some strong swimmer in his agony,"

he names them as occurring in "Childe Harold," instead of in "Don Juan."


     LONDON: WHITTAKER & CO.




TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES


The following corrections have been made to the text:

     Page ii: 2. FAMILIAR FRENCH QUOTATIONS & PROVERBS.[period
     missing in original]

     Page 9: Bread and butter are glad to eat.[period missing in
     original]

     Page 26: 445.[period missing in original] DOOR. When one door
     shuts another opens.

     Page 45: HONOUR. Better[original has Bettter] poor with honour

     Page 62: 1099. MONEY. The abundance of money ruins
     youth.[period missing in original]

     Page 64: 1135. NECESSITY. Make a virtue of necessity.[period
     missing in original]

     Page 74: so crows the young.[period missing in original]

Index entries were changed to match the spelling and hyphenation in the
main text. Proverb numbers were corrected when necessary. The changes
are as follows:

     Page 107: Ageârueful 1342[original has 1343]

     Page 107: Appetite 475[original has 495]

     Page 108: Birdcall[original has Bird--call]

     Page 108: Birds--little 970[original has 940]

     Page 108: Bone--tongue 1636[original has 1616]

     Page 109: Branch--roost[original has root]

     Page 109: Butter-cakes[original has Buttercakes]

     Page 109: Candle-stick[original has Candlestick]

     Page 110: Churchyard--May 810[original has 809]

     Page 110: Cloth--coat[original has cost]

     Page 110: Cold--soon 1468[original has 1469]

     Page 112: Easy chair[original has Easy-chair]--frugality

     Page 112: Elbow grease[original has Elbow-grease]

     Page 112: Estate--trade 1647[original has 501]

     Page 112: Evening--red 501[original has 1647]

     Page 112: Face--painting 1061[original has 1051]

     Page 112: Fast-day[original has Fast day]

     Page 112: Fault--woo[original has woe]

     Page 112: Feathers--fine 563[original has 535]

     Page 113: Fish--cat[original has eat]

     Page 113: Fish--small--venture 1700[original has 1458]

     Page 113: Fish--small 1458[original has 1700]

     Page 113: Folk--poor, pottage 1369[original has 1269]

     Page 113: Forehead--mind[original has wind]

     Page 114: Friday--sing[original has sup]

     Page 114: Garner--dearth[original has death]

     Page 114: Gate--stile[original has still]

     Page 114: Gentleman--coat[original has cost]

     Page 115: Groat a year[original has a-year]

     Page 115: Hawk--hand-saw[original has handsaw]

     Page 115: Heart sick[original has Heart-sick]

     Page 115: Horse-manger[original has Horse--manger]

     Page 116: House--well-ordered[original has well ordered]

     Page 116: the section header I" has been added

     Page 116: Ill--doing[original has Ill-doing]

     Page 116: Ill fortune[original has Ill-fortune]

     Page 116: Ill wed[original has Ill-wed]

     Page 117: Ladder--crosses 359[original has 912]

     Page 117: Laugh--hearts ache[original has heartache]

     Page 117: Law breakers[original has Law-breakers]

     Page 117: Life--end[original has Life's end]

     Page 117: Lion, dead--dog 986[original has 987]

     Page 118: Love, subjects'[original has subject's]

     Page 119: Master's--wine[original has Master's wine]

     Page 119: May--hot 810[original has 809]

     Page 119: Mice--cat's[original has cat] away

     Page 119: Morning--grey[original has gray]

     Page 119: Mote--self love[original has self-love]

     Page 119: Muck[original has Much]--riches

     Page 119: Night--stumble[original has slumber]

     Page 119: No--woman's 1868[original has 1861]

     Page 119: Noland[original has No-land]--title

     Page 120: Old block[original has clock]

     Page 120: Ounce--mischief 1086[original has 1686]

     Page 120: Ox--drink 450[original has 456]

     Page 120: Pater-noster[original has Paternoster]--churches

     Page 122: Ribs--birchen twigs[original has birchen-twigs]

     Page 122: Seven--[original has comma]rise at

     Page 122: Shave--hand-saw[original has handsaw]

     Page 123: Silver lining--cloud[original has clouds]

     Page 123: Soberness--conceals[original has concealed]

     Page 123: Spain--wine 450[original has 456]

     Page 123: Spending--bung-hole[original has bunghole]

     Page 124: Story--re-telling[original has retelling]

     Page 124: Sun shines[original has Sunshine]--moon

     Page 124: Tar--ship[original has ships]

     Page 124: Tenants--ill[original has bad]

     Page 124: Thief--receiver 1340[original has 1341]

     Page 124: Thief--receivers 1341[original has 1340]

     Page 124: Thistles--harvest 752[original has 732]

     Page 125: Trough--own 1480[original has 1478]

     Page 125: Use--nature 1692[original has 373]

     Page 126: Will--women[original has Will, woman's]

     Page 126: Wind--words 1838[original has 1000]

     Page 126: Wisdom--husband[original has harbour]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Dictionary of English Proverbs and
Proverbial Phrases, by Thomas Preston

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ENGLISH PROVERBS ***

***** This file should be named 39281-8.txt or 39281-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/9/2/8/39281/

Produced by Delphine Lettau, Lisa Reigel, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
